what we are are avatars of the one the
one awareness is exploring all of its
possibilities through different avatars
so somehow there is this field of
awareness
that is in some sense deeply and
fundamentally who you really are
what do you think about the AI
scientists that signed the paper saying
that we need to slow AI down because and
I had one of them on the show because it
passed a touring test faster than they
thought it's just moving faster than
they expected and they're very worried
do you think that AI will ever become
conscious I'm actually not too worried
about AI right now myself so I'm not one
of the alarmists that says we need to
stop and worry about it the thing that
would alarm me more would be if there
were some kind of law that
criminalized most people from doing it
to let a few people do it a few
companies do it that that alarms me so
if there's going to be any kind of laws
they should be Universal and no one
should be excluded is that
but why aren't you worried about AI it's
pretty easy even with chat GPT to to
give it questions that can't answer
right now it's it's basically a good
statistical analyzer it's not deeply
intelligent
it will find things that we humans won't
find in in medical
searches you know and so forth but
that's because it just can't handle more
data and do more statistical analysis
than we can but it's not deeply
intelligent and the the founders would
tell you that it's it's fairly
straightforward kinds of algorithms so
and in terms of Consciousness there is
no Theory right now
of any kind
that can start with physical systems
like circuits software
and explain even one specific conscious
experience how it arises so I'll be very
very clear there's no theory on the
planet today that can start with
an artificial intelligence and a
description of some kind of circuit or
some kind of software pattern of
activity
and can give you a specific conscious
experience like the taste of chocolate
or the smell of garlic where you would
say this pattern of activity must be
identical must be the taste of chocolate
it could not be the smell of of a rose
there's nothing on the table and there's
nothing even close so if AIS can be
conscious there are no theories right
now at all that could explain how that
could possibly be and nothing that makes
it even plausible
so so I'm not too too worried about AIS
being conscious I think that they will
eventually outperform humans in in most
everyday
activities but
simply because they'll have more compute
power and can search more deeply than we
can Will so for people that don't know
you I'm going to give a super brief
synopsis and by all means put in where I
go awry here but you believe that this
is all a simulation we are living in a
simulation none of this is real space
time itself is not real we are
effectively living inside of what you
call the headset that everything you've
ever known or ever experienced is all
effectively an illusion it is a computer
video game by way of analogy
right given that and an audience
listening at home you'll notice he did
not say no so
um and this is something I've I have
forever just dismissed out of hand that
we're living in a simulation and I say
dismissed out of hand because I don't
have any evidence to back it up and I've
heard all the arguments uh from a
mathematical perspective that if you
believe that humans are capable of
creating
um photorealistic simulations and you
give any rate of progress whatsoever we
will eventually create a simulation we
certainly with AI and how rapidly it's
been advancing I think people now really
have a sense of whoa we really are going
to be able to do this apple Vision Pro
certainly gives an indication like you
will really be able to create some very
compelling very realistic
um things inside of a visor so I think
people more now more than ever could see
how we could get into a simulation a
simulated world that's convincing I'll
leave it at that and if that's true then
why would we then once we create that
simulation not create another simulation
and I will just tell you as somebody the
t-shirt that I'm wearing is literally
about this we're building a a game that
we hope over time will be a truly
simulated world that people will go in
they will have an identity inside that
game okay so if we know that Loop exists
then once the game inside the game gets
powerful enough it will do another
simulation once the game inside that
game inside that game gets powerful
enough it will do a simulation and so
you end up in this point where just
mathematically it would make more sense
to believe that you're in one of those
you know conceivably infinite
recursive Loops of a simulation then
that you're in base reality
but it just always seemed weird to me to
say no no we're in one of the
simulations
but the more I research you the more I'm
like maybe we really are in a simulation
and to that point you talk about
Consciousness as being fundamental and
so I'll need you to explain that for
people that that will be so jarring it
will take them a while to really grock
that but that Consciousness is
fundamental
so couldn't AI ever become a window into
what you call a conscious agent in the
same way that a human child is or a dog
is or whatever
that I think is possible absolutely so
if you don't mind walk walk people
through how it could be possible that
physicality everything they see touch
taste the loves that they have all of
that is a simulation and not fundamental
meaning it it arises out of something
else but Consciousness is the
fundamental yeah the foundation
well there are two arguments for the
idea that what we see is not
an objective reality that exists
independent of us and is there prior to
when we look at it so in physics
the Nobel Prize last December
was given to three physicists for the
experimental
testing of a clean prediction of quantum
theory that something called local
realism is false local realism is the
claim that physical objects like
electrons have definite so realism is
the claim that electron has a definite
value of position momentum and spin when
it's not observed
and locality is the claim that those
properties have influences that
propagate through space-time no faster
than the speed of light
and the conjunction of those two
claims the properties exist even when
they're not perceived
even when they're not measured and they
have influences that propagate no faster
than the speed of light
that's local realism and local realism
is false how did they prove it
so that's why you get a Nobel Prize so
John Klaus or Anton zeilinger and and um
over decades there's a string of
experiments that were Tighter and
Tighter each experiment closed loopholes
in the previous ones so the experiments
have to deal with their complicated
experiments I mean
zeilinger was actually using photons
from outer space to get entangled
um
particles that they could use that you
could couldn't argue that they were
somehow
you know being connected or correlated
some in some deep way but basically the
the experiments are set up to show that
properties like position or momentum or
spin typically they like to use spin
um in principle could not have definite
values until you actually measured them
so one way that they do this
mathematically are there these Bell
inequalities and so if if the statistics
of the correlations between the particle
spins you have two different particles
that you're measuring those spins axis
for example and if they had definite
values even when you weren't observing
you'd have certain pattern of
correlation And if quantum mechanics is
right and those values don't exist until
you measure them then you have a
different pattern of correlation and so
that's what they they do they have to
look at a bunch of different
measurements look at the correlations
and the correlations come out to be with
with quantum theory predicts and not
what our classical intuitions would tell
us and so the this was done by
clauser decades ago but it's so
counterintuitive that people are going
okay well there must be a loophole here
so then they close a series of loopholes
and finally they started getting photons
from like distant galaxies where the
photons couldn't possibly have certain
within space-time causal connections and
close that loophole and um
so that's one One Direction so
physicists tell us that local realism at
least for microscopic you know subatomic
particles recently they've gotten up to
groups of 700
um atoms I believe
so it's
starting to they're they're showing that
these effects
of these superposition effects of
quantum theory are not just at the very
very small end of things so local
realism is false now one can still try
to say well but that's for really tiny
things but at the macroscopic level
maybe look local realism is true and
that leads to a problem because there's
no principle distinction
in quantum theory between the
microscopic and the Mac you can't say it
10 to the minus
you know 20 centimeters that's you know
that's
that's the limit there's there's no
boundary between micro and macro so and
this is a well-known open problem so
that's One Direction I'll just go with
that now the
um the the other direction of argument
is from evolution of a natural selection
where you can ask a technical question
evolution
shapes sensory systems
to guide adaptive Behavior so
that means to keep your life along long
enough
to reproduce right so you you have
vision and touch and hearing and smell
and they've been shaped so that um
you're able to get the food you need
mate and stay alive at least long enough
to reproduce and pass your genes On to
the Next Generation
that's the standard story of evolution
many
theorists also think that Evolution
shapes our sensory systems to tell us
truths about objective reality like when
I see an apple that's because there
really is an apple and the red color and
the shape really exist even when they're
not perceived
and so that's notice that's a step
Beyond just saying that
our senses evolved to guide adaptive
Behavior they want to say more than that
they want to say that if you guide
adaptive Behavior you're going to see
the truth
so so I decided with my colleagues
caitan prakash and Manish Singh and
Robert pretner and others
um
my graduate students Justin Mark and
Brian Marion to to test this you know
evolution is a mathematically precise
Theory we have evolutionary Game Theory
so there's a technical question what is
the probability
that
evolution of a natural selection would
shape any sensory system to see truths
about objective reality the structure of
objective reality
and it's straightforward to prove
um
what we do is we look at various kinds
of so-called Fitness payoff functions
maybe payoff functions that are that are
and we can ask do these payoff functions
preserve certain kinds of structures in
the world like
um
orders a total order or or a partial
order or a metric or topology or
measurable structure so we can say we
don't know what objective reality is but
suppose it had this structure
what is the probability that Fitness
payoffs which govern our Evolution would
actually have information about that
structure in the world so that we could
actually be evolved to have some insight
into that structure of objective reality
and in case after case the answer is
um the probability is zero the there are
payoff functions that would preserve the
structure but those payoff functions
have probability zero in the set of all
payoff functions
so so that means if you're a betting man
um you would bet long odds against it so
it doesn't mean that it can't happen
it's just that the probability is is
zero and so I take this as a convergence
between two of our big theories in
science evolution of a natural selection
and quantum theory Quantum field Theory
both are telling us that local realism
is false
and so so I think a good metaphor then
is as you were saying
um
like a user interface or a video game
where you render on the Fly what you
need so I'm looking at you I'm rendering
a Tom face and I look away and I'm not
rendering it someone else might be
looking at you and they're rendering
their Tom face but but their time face
is not the same as mine it's going to be
at a different angle and so forth so we
render on the Fly and that's what
physics is telling us basically that
local realism is false we render on the
Fly and so the where you're taking that
from is the Quantum uncertainty
principle basically everything has a
probability of being in a given State
and the reason that it's just a big
question mark is because nothing's
looking at it so it does not need to
render that it doesn't need to decide
the system which is the simulation
which people think of as space-time but
they're almost certainly I've
interviewed you so many times and I know
how hard it is to escape this Matrix but
they're thinking of things within space
time being real but once you start
looking at space time as purely a
simulation and that the then rendering
only happens when you look at something
so that to me makes a hypothesis that I
think your data backs up which if that
were really the case then
um I understand why big things would
adhere to what seem like a different set
of rules where things are static and
small things would not because it you're
far less likely to observe A first order
consequence of something microscopic you
may be observing a second or third order
consequence which raises questions for
me that I'm sure we will get to at some
point but just to close the loop on that
so first sort of consequence I can look
up and see the moon I see planets I see
stars and so for that to be persistent
which is going to be a big thing in in
our discussion today this is like the
prime thing I want to talk to you about
is persistence and what that means
but big things will need to be
persistent and therefore there has to be
there is a constant collapsing of its
probabilities uh because there are so
many things that require even if it's
just its effects on gravity there's so
many things quote unquote witnessing
that or measuring that so I get why
those would be stable but then things
where they're so small that there's very
little that hinges on that that that
would need to be directly rendered that
would need to because you can get away
with sort of the probabilistic rendering
of the big things and their influence by
these smaller things but you don't need
a direct representation of the spin for
instance of a particle that that all
things that will quote unquote measure
it don't see don't interact with or
whatever because nobody's effectively
looking at it it does not need to be
rendered
right so a good so it also feel right
just uh no that's a great question and
so great question I was not asking a
question I was stating a hypothesis
or no I think does that make sense at
the macro to the micro level well it it
it does but I think a good analogy here
that might help clarify the issue is is
so
in say Grand Theft Auto right I look
over I'm playing with somebody who's you
know in Canada and somebody else is in
Europe and someone else is in China
we're all playing a remote version of it
and virtual reality and I look over and
I see a red Porsche to my right
and so I say is there a red portion of
my right and the guy in China says oh
yeah I see a red portion and the guy in
Canada agrees and the guy in Europe
agrees as well so of course each of them
is rendering their own red Porsche
so there is some reality that's
coordinating all of these perceptions
right so the guy in Canada didn't see a
red Porsche until he looked
but when he looked
um there was this whole world you know
of circuits and software that you don't
see there's some super computer that's
coordinating the whole thing how's it
coordinating in that particular metaphor
right the there's a super computer
that's that's taking the inputs from
like your headset what direction are you
looking with your headset maybe you've
got a body suit so it's looking at your
arm movements and so forth and is
feeding all that into a supercomputer
where it's got a model of the game and
in that model there's some red portion
model of course there's no red portion
in the computer and it knows then how to
coordinate and send the photons to your
headset in Canada and my headset and
Irvine and someone else's headset in in
China so that we have this notion of a
persistent reality of a Porsche even
though individually for each one of us
um local realism is false the Porsche
doesn't even exist until I render it and
there's no red Porsche inside the super
computer so that's sort of the idea is
that's that space time he is just a
headset and there's behind space-time
there's going to be an incredibly
complicated now
realm to explore that's as least as
complicated more complicated as like the
super computer is to my little headset
the headset is sophisticated as
beautiful technology but the super
computer is you know really really
powerful thing the same thing will be
true of space-time it's just our headset
but if we look beyond that headset we're
going to you know be finding a realm
that's far more complicated so in some
sense science
up till now has only studied our headset
we've studied inside space and time
we're taking our first baby steps to
start to explore we've we've cut our
teeth in science on studying our headset
we learned the tools in the last three
or four hundred years about experiments
and clean mathematical theories and the
loot between experiments and theories
but we thought we were studying
objective reality we were studying our
headset but now we have the tools to
actually take a First Step Beyond
space-time and start to find structures
Beyond space-time and their projection
back into space-time and so from that
point of view
our view that objects in space-time
we've taken that to be the fundamental
reality we'll look sort of parochial um
hopefully in just a few decades will
yeah I think the Next Generation where
many people will have spent a lot of
time in virtual reality
My Generation didn't spend a lot of time
in virtual reality so this is hard
concept but if you don't I've heard you
say that before I don't think that's
going to get people where you think it's
going to get them maybe not uh but in
this episode I want to try to explain
why I think that and and get
um your take so here's what I think we
need to do first and then we'll go even
deeper there's two things we need to do
in the near term
um one I think we we need to in in our
previous
um interviews we spent a lot of time
dealing with the headset So for anybody
that's sort of confused on that idea of
you're living in a simulation everything
that you know and love and touch and
have ever experienced it is all a
simulation you have never existed
outside of the headset so if right there
your brain breaks go watch the other
episodes we spend a tremendous amount of
time building that up but for now what I
want to do is say okay I'm going to
assume that you get it that your whole
life is basically Grand Theft Auto okay
and and people understand it you've been
in there playing the game and they
understand the difference between
playing the game and the computer
rules and things that give birth to that
game and so that's that's the difference
what I want to do now is map that one
layer back so I want to take that idea
of your life is Grand Theft Auto but
there's this thing called space time
that's outside of it and gets what
you're actually saying which is that
same relationship but move back one very
profound level
because what it does is it inverts
everything and what it says is that the
universe
the universe space time is an emergent
phenomenon from Consciousness that
Consciousness is in this to use that
analogy just to map it back that
Consciousness is the quote unquote
computer and rules of the system and
then the simulation is what we all think
of as real life okay so that's where
we're mapping so one does does that
track for you that we can move that
analogy sort of one rung deeper is
probably the word you'd be most
comfortable with
right so absolutely a model in which we
take Consciousness is fundamental and we
have a mathematical model of
Consciousness and we then try to show
how space-time gets rendered from that
absolutely perfect
you can reboot your life your health
even your career anything you want all
you need is discipline I can teach you
the tactics that I learned while growing
a billion dollar business that will
allow you to see your goals through
whether you want better health stronger
relationships a more successful career
any of that is possible with the mindset
and business programs in Impact Theory
University join the thousands of
students who have already accomplished
amazing things tap now for a free trial
and get started today
so now in this interview instead of
making our references to Grand Theft
Auto unless we need to for whatever for
an anchor point I want to talk about
space-time okay like a simulation okay I
want to talk about space-time like it is
Grand Theft Auto because researching you
this time I I want to sit with it for a
while before I start saying I'm 100
behind it I mentioned one of our
previous interviews that I do revert to
the mean after I spend time with you but
each time you're shifting me farther
where my mean is sort of closer to you
this time at least in the research I had
a real sense of he's right I don't know
about the the Consciousness is the only
part that we may disagree sure but that
I you really gave me an internally
consistent set of logic points for why
space time is the simulation
and when I grant you a few base
assumptions that we'll go through my own
world view makes more sense okay and so
I realized for the first time again
fully acknowledging that I may revert to
the mean once I've interviewed three or
four other people on totally different
topics and this is sort of cleared my
system but right now as we do this I
really felt like you improved
what I consider a prediction engine I
think of the human mind as a prediction
engine and the closer you get to
Baseline truth the more you're able to
predict the outcome of your behaviors
what I'm watching happening with AI
which is why I wanted to start there I
can't make sense
I don't when I think about a
hallucinating AI I'm like I don't
understand when I think about AI pulling
patterns out of noise I don't understand
when persistence is difficult for AI I
don't understand and then I research you
and click click click those pieces fall
into place when I assume that it's all
already a simulation and that AI is
simply revealing to me how the
simulation works and so but the fact
that we disagree or maybe we don't I
think AI will be Windows into
Consciousness I think AI is leveraging
your own theories to create AI right now
as we're talking about it I think I'm a
lay person everybody needs to take this
with a huge grain of salt
trust me I am well aware of my
limitations but I think right now that
what we're witnessing with things like
stable diffusion where AI is creating
an image out of the infinite
possibilities that exist within this the
the possibility space of Noise Okay for
people that don't understand how stable
diffusion works that's how it works is
it dips into the noise to find a pattern
and then solidifies that pattern to
reveal is this what you wanted and what
I'm saying is when I research you I
realize oh my God that's precisely what
your theory predicts
in the idea of girdles incompleteness
theorem which I have struggled with so
hard in the previous interviews I feel
bad for everybody that has to watch me
go through that but the more I feel like
I can grasp why you keep coming back to
it and why this sort of infinite
possibility space is so important to
understand when I watch AI pull a static
image out of infinite possibility I'm
like oh my God that's exactly what
you've been trying to describe okay put
a pin in that okay because what I want
to talk about now is consciousness as
fundamental because this is the part if
people are really paying attention this
is the part that will change your world
view to to get into the the
um space time as a as a construct as a
simulation you first have to understand
that you think that's born of the as
born of Consciousness itself and I
please dear audience stick with this
because this point is going to be very
important as we piece together the
predictions that your own model is going
to make but they have to understand this
first so
how is it possible
that Consciousness the thing that I
think everybody intuits
comes from stacking neurons neurons
neurons neurons neurons and you pass
through a cricket an ant a mouse a cat a
dog a dolphin a gorilla and humans it
just feels like a just stack more
neurons and then you're ultimately going
to get these more sophisticated neurons
which give you a more sophisticated
Consciousness that seems so self-evident
and you're to me
but you're saying nope no and and by the
way I'll just on the pin I'll just
mention that I agree with you that AIS
could actually give us a window into
consciousness
but they won't create Consciousness that
was that was all I was saying
interesting so I think we disagree about
that okay so we can go into thoughtful
oh it's so much farther ahead when we
get there absolutely ignorant
perspective so on
Consciousness being fundamental
um meaning that's all there is that
that's right so the idea would be
um and this is by the way in some sense
not new leibniz in his monendology
had the same idea so I really appreciate
that you assume I know what that means
and from Context I can tease it out but
can you tell us what that means oh so so
liveness was this genius now
contemporary of Newton sort of a
antagonistic they they both invented
calculus roughly the same time there was
a question about who was first and so
forth and they they they were you know
sort of at each other but but they were
so they were contemporaries but leibniz
um
had this idea that that Consciousness
couldn't emerge from physical systems he
has a famous argument of the mill where
he he in one paragraph basically
dismisses the idea that objects inside
space and time like neurons for example
could create Consciousness for him it
was so obvious that he spent a paragraph
on it and moved on and then he's got a
book called The monodology where he was
proposing uh essentially that
Consciousness perceiving entities are
the fundamental reality and that they
were interacting right if I break down
the words
monodology
monad so m-o-n-a-d is a technical term
for him it was he it was a new term for
him
monodology is then the books name
monodology and it was basically it was a
Dynamics it was a strange Dynamics we
called a pre-established Harmony where
God so he had he brought God in on on
his thing I believe to to sort of
coordinate Nate all the the perceptions
of these so meaning God was the first
mover the fun yeah the fundamental right
okay but he saw it as a creator
uh touching things with like a Divine
spark of Consciousness
yeah but his ontology was that that
um
the fundamental reality Beyond
space-time was these monads the these
perceiving entities basically and but
but God I think was that that was the
deepest reality for for lightness
um there I'm less secure I'm not sure
exactly what his thoughts were on God
but I believe that's what he said
um so I just brought that up just to say
that you know we're not the first to
have this kind of idea centuries ago uh
leibniz with this modern knowledge he
had an idea that perceiving entities
experiencing entities could be more
fundamental than than the physical
space-time world all right you talk
about conscious agents right do you mean
exactly that same thing
that's right so conscious agents are a
mathematically precise statement of what
we mean by Consciousness right so as a
scientist it's it's not enough for me
just to say okay there's Consciousness
Beyond space-time and it's fundamental I
have to write down a mathematical
description of what I mean by that so
what aspect of Consciousness do I take
to be fundamental and and what's the
mathematical description so if I was if
you think about it think about
Consciousness there's of course
experiences
um there's learning memory problem
solving intelligence maybe free will
there's lots of things the notion of a
self all these things that you might
think a theory of Consciousness needs to
to
incorporate I'm so sorry and I should
have done this before and that apology
goes to the audience if you're new to
Donald it's probably worth just a quick
sentence about what Consciousness is oh
well so I would say consciousness
is um the ability to have experiences
like the taste of chocolate a headache
emotions so this thing feels like
something yeah the way a lot of
philosophers will talk about is it's is
to have a conscious experience there's
something it's like
to be a conscious entity it's something
there's something that's like to have a
headache there's something that's like
to have your
um you know to eat to have a nice cup of
coffee or something like that okay and
so let's call that qualia again you're
stealing directly from you but just so
we have words because quality is going
to become very important as we get into
your paper and all of that okay so back
to conscious agents
so what we decided to do was uh we don't
want to throw the kitchen sink in our
mathematical definition so we took what
we thought was the bare minimum starting
point there are experiences like the
taste of chocolate smell of garlic and
so forth and those experiences
affect the probabilities of
other experiences occurring
so there are experiences and
probabilistic relationships among
experiences
that's it so we're not bringing in the
notion of a self
learning memory problem solving
intelligence none of that
what we're saying is yeah all that stuff
is important but we have to prove how it
arises from just experiences and
probabilistic relationships and long
experiences so that's as a scientist you
try it's what we call outcomes razor you
want to have the minimum number of
assumptions at the start of your theory
every theory has assumptions there are
the Miracles of the theory we want as
few Miracles as possible right so our
only Miracles are there well it's a big
miracle there are experiences and
probabilistic relationships among
experiences
and we formalize that
the experiences we just write down
what's called probability spaces we can
if you want we can talk about
probability spaces and the relationships
among experiences are what we call
markovian kernels and we get what's
called Markov chains so it's very simple
Dynamics so we'll we'll explain what
markovian Dynamics are in a second I
don't now that I finally have at least a
tiny bit of a grasp I don't know how
important it is that people understand
that sure but I do want to know how
important is it that uh one bit of
qualia
impacts other qualia like does that does
that relationship play heavily into the
idea of Consciousness as a fundamental
agent yes we we stipulate that there's a
fundamental property that that
experiences art in a vacuum experiences
probabilistically lead to other
experiences okay it's very interesting
that you said uh not in a vacuum because
that my whole thesis is that
the construct of space-time this
simulation let's just be very clear the
simulation that is this real world sorry
that's a terrible use the word real this
simulation that everybody lives in and
experiences
is required this is this is my pitch
uh the simulation is a required
constraint in order to give context that
something can be like anything but that
for Consciousness to explore the
possibility space of qualia you have to
have a rule set
and the rule set that we're all in which
may be one of a gazillion headsets
but the rule set that we're all in
creates the possibility for the subset
of qualia that we as human beings or
Lizards or whatever experience but
without that rule set that is space time
right we would not have enough
limitations to give us the context in
order to feel a certain way
exactly that's that's a very good way to
put it so that
um
a lizard presumably sees things very
very differently than I do pigeons have
four color receptors we only have three
pigeons have four yeah that's right so
they see more color than we do and birds
and I feel cheated now I knew
15 of women do I did not know pigeons
yeah the mantis shrimp has more than 10.
photoreceptors yes that's right
different kinds of or or pigments that
are that are used for for the
photoreception process so so we're we're
we may be cheated in in many many ways
that's for sure so so yeah we uh and we
don't for example perceive
um polarization of light and birds and
baby bees do is they they can perceive
the polarization of light
um we can't directly experience electric
Fields And there are there are animals
in the water that can do that
so some to see infrared some of the sea
ultraviolet that we can't so so we're we
have a very very small window and other
animals are not restricted to the
windows in which we we see so I like
your idea that there there's an infinite
space of conscious experiences to
explore and when we look at different
animals we're seeing different
Explorations with different headsets and
and different as you say different
constraints and it's it's um in some
sense consciousness
exploring all of its possibilities all
the possible
ways that uh to explore so in some sense
we're here for the ride and we should
enjoy the ride we're we're you know
we're exploring
um we thought this was the final reality
no this is just one of
countless possible headsets just one of
countless
and um we'll enjoy this right and then
Consciousness will then it's looking
through other headsets so I like your
idea yeah that it's you know there's
some kind of consistency some kind of
coherence but it's a subset of the
experiences there's an infinite number
of experiences to explore so
um this ride
never ends okay so when I think about
Consciousness as fundamental I cannot
help but imagine a blob
that then takes shape in the form of a
human or a lizard or an avocado whatever
um
help me understand
what do you have an image in your head
of what the what Consciousness is is it
just completely non-physical
well maybe the closest I can get that
would be the way that we communicate to
people would be
um if you go into an entirely quiet room
shut off all the lights close your eyes
and get very very still and don't think
good luck
that's right usually letting go of
thought is not easy but but if you can
go for a few seconds or a minute
with absolutely no thought and now
you're just aware
you realize yeah I can be aware
without being aware of anything in
particular I I am
fundamentally awareness
and into that awareness right now are
coming a cup
a microphone a table
I can close my eyes and those are those
are gone from awareness so somehow there
is this
field of awareness
that is in some sense
deeply and fundamentally who you really
are
that so that it seems like your theory
would say that's false
well it's going to say that the con so
the reason why I talk about this
awareness is that when we talk about all
these specific conscious experiences
we have to write down something that's
called a probability space
first
required mathematically to do this so we
write down a probability space in which
probability of qualia that's right
probability of qualia so you have to
write down the space of all the
potential quality of that this
particular conscious agent could
experience
so here is this space and it's it
there's the mathematical structure it's
just sitting there
prior to any particular experience
happening it's just sitting there
and it took me a few years to ask myself
the question what
is that space I had to write it down I
couldn't do the math I couldn't write
down my markovian Dynamics until I wrote
down the probability spaces but as you
know the way we do it is we just of
course have to write that down so you
don't even think about you write down
the probability space and you go on to
the fun stuff you you write down now the
Dynamics and so forth stars but a few
years later I came back and go well wait
a minute
I went too quickly on this first part I
had to write down a probability space
what does that mean because this is a
space prior to any specific conscious
experiences
happening
and so the best I can say right now is
that perhaps is
the mathematical counterpart to what I
was just describing which is the
awareness
that you can experience
prior to having any particular specific
conscious experience arise in that
awareness
so that's that's why I talk about it in
in that way can I just restate that to
make sure that I understand and Linger
on it for a second for the audience so
you're using words that I know you know
are dangerous that Annika Harris has
warned you about letting people carry
the sense of self into all this
because you said you are the awareness
but really Consciousness is the
awareness that animates me in some way
or it needs my constraints in order for
it to experience the qualia I think
that's the right way to think about it
and so in those moments where either
through meditation I get to True where I
am simply aware of the qualia of being
aware but when it's not aware of
anything in particular
so I'm not aware that my foot hurts I'm
not aware that my
um my stomach is churning on food I'm
not aware of something I need to do
later in that day I am just the the
potential to point that awareness at
something is the thing that I'm sitting
in
that that's who we really are
so that
that feels right but I know it's
re-trapping me in my sense of self that
I am a real thing your whole thing
clicks into place for me when I realize
that according to your theory and this
makes a lot of things make sense in my
own life I am simply one instantiation
right that creates a set of what I call
biological limitations right that then
once I have those constraints now the
fundamental element of Consciousness can
begin to explore its qualia the the
different things that like oh in this
human form I can experience these things
with all the context that this person
has he responds to this thing in this
way right
um agreed there are some deep
complexities with that but we'll push
those off for later okay so if if that's
where we're at my fundamental question
is why does Consciousness why is it
compelled to explore these qualia States
that's the sixty four thousand dollar
question that's so I don't know but I
can I'm of course that's the very
natural question to ask and I agree with
what you just said I said I mean I don't
want to reify the self what what we are
are avatars of the one effectively and
the one Consciousness is the one
awareness is exploring all of its
possibilities through different avatars
why there I you know
I think there may be some deep
mathematical reasons
so it may be that
I mean there's there are theorems to the
effect that no system can completely
know itself
it's impossible so it feels for example
if I if I have a computer and I want the
computer to explore itself how is it
going to know itself well it's going to
have to build a model of itself and
write down what well in the very process
of building a model of itself and
writing into its memory things about
itself it's becoming more complicated
it's changing itself so now
to really understand yourself after now
describe what it just did and now to so
you get this infinite Loop um and so
there are there are problems with
self
understanding
it's not possible in many cases provably
not possible to have a complete
understanding of yourself you get into
this infinite Loop of now I have to be
more complicated to understand myself
after I just understood myself right and
so that's one direction of this another
direction is
um
there are there's a whole hierarchy of
Infinities um so the the integers like
so one two three up to Infinity that's
an infinite number of integers we call
that accountable infinity or alef0 the
Hebrew letter l f and zero just meaning
the smallest Infinity
but there are other infinities so the
next if you take
um the set of all subsets of integers so
like one two and one five and two three
four look at all the possible subsets of
integers and ask how many subsets are
there how many subsets of integers can
you come up with it turns out that of
course there's an infinite number of of
these subsets because every number is
divisible by an infinite number of no
we're just grouping them together so I'm
saying think about the group one and two
so that's a group
now one in five got it so we can group
an infinite number that's an infinite
number of times so those are called all
the different possible subsets of the
integers got it and there's of course an
infinite number of them because one is a
group two is a group three so we already
know there's an infinite number but
there's more than that how much more it
turns out it's a bigger infinity
so the it's a bigger infinity it's a
bigger say what
that well that's what mathematicians
said when Cantor the mathematician who
first came up with this
um when he first proved this feels a bit
like my speaker goes to 11.
why not just take make 10 louder
but this one goes this one goes it's
actually a different size for infinity
and so possible I literally can't wrap
my head around that there there's
something
um called a cantor's diagonal argument
so it so there's a simple diagonal
argument where you can actually show on
on paper pen and paper that um it's
impossible
um to capture all the power set this
bigger infinity
um with the smaller Infinity so he gives
what's called a cantor's diagonal so if
people want to you know check me on this
you just look up Cantor and cantor's
diagonal argument for a proof that there
are these bigger Infinities
um and you can actually I think most
people can actually follow the proof I
mean it's it's mind-bending but
um you can follow it
well there's not just one bigger
infinity that's a left one this is the
bigger infinity now take the power set
so by the way taking the set of all
subsets is called taking the power set
so the power set is all the possible
subsets
so now I've got alif1 which is the
bigger infinity which is the power all
the power sets available but now I can
take all the power set the power set of
lf1 that gives me a lift two take the
power set again at alif3 L4 and this
goes forever so there so Infinity is not
one thing there's an infinite
unending hierarchy of ever larger
infinities
so we have to on my my view take this
into account in our Theory Of
Consciousness that this this oh all of
these different infinities
are valid directions for projection of
this one deeper Consciousness and so
we're going to so the answer to your
question may again be
because cantor's hierarchy never ends
this exploration never ends the
exploration of the possibilities of
consciousness of qualia is in principle
never ending
I would just say
um I'm in deep water here and I'm maybe
over my head fair enough uh this is the
the fun part of exploring this is how
what are the predictions that are made
based on the hypothesis right so every
hypothesis makes a prediction and then
you have something you can test and it
becomes verifiable so this is where it
gets very interesting to me is what the
predictions are that it makes so going
back to
um the hypothesis that I have that okay
maybe this really is all a simulation
because as we go to build the next
simulation it actually tells us more it
it gives me a better way to understand
what's already happening now again I'm a
lay person so I may be way out of my own
depth here but I think people will be
able to follow the internal logic so
this is what I was stating earlier about
AI so the way that AI works is there is
an infinite possibility space in noise
so you can just think of it as a screen
and that screen can have think of every
conceivable pixel that's there and
depending on what color you make any one
of those pixels if you have like a grand
enough resolution meaning enough pixels
in the finite space that you can
recreate any image that's ever been seen
or created or even just what's possible
so if anybody's seen what they call an
AI hallucination where the AI will just
continually like push into itself and
every time it pushes in and a pattern
begins to emerge it then crystallizes
that pattern and basically says the most
likely shape to emerge out of this would
be a staircase but as you push in the
most likely shape to emerge out of that
would be a cathedral and and it just
keeps going and going and going and
going and it never runs out of sort of
most likely things to emerge out of this
pattern is because it's looked at all of
these things
and so it will create things that it's
seen before so the Mona Lisa would be
one representation that is very
predictable especially given how many
times a Mona Lisa has been replicated so
one of the things in the possibility
space is the Mona Lisa is a rembrand is
David is you looking at your wife this
morning is one of the possibility spaces
that it could eventually draw out of
this thing so it's it's constantly
searching for what is the next potential
pattern now my whole thing is
what really starts to make this
interesting and the reason that I think
that the simulation isn't something to
be brushed aside as being trivial but is
critically important if you're right
that what the what Consciousness is
doing is it has some motivation for some
reason that neither of us know why but
that it is cycling through all of its
permutations
if that's what's really happening then
to do that you need a set of rules and
so what I realize is I'm building the
going back to the Grand Theft Auto so
we're building a simulated world and I
realize as we build it all I'm doing is
making the most detailed if this than
that statements and so I'm trying to
create these algorithms that then
not trick you but they give you a set of
rules by which you now must adhere but
by doing that by actually limiting the
possibility space I can make a game
that's quote unquote fun so it is in the
limitation it's in the setting of rules
that this becomes a useful space
so what I want to know is you you talk a
lot about like hey we want to get out of
the headset do you really do you want to
get out of the headset or do you want to
manipulate the headset
well when I say we want to get out of
the headset that's as a scientist trying
to look for a deeper Theory so as a
scientist I mean we've
Sciences let me ask you so the reason
that Einstein his breakthroughs were so
useful is within the headset they let us
do something are you trying to do
something in the headset or so if you
understand how the headset works you can
either manipulate the like Einstein Bend
space time right you can create GPS
which if you didn't understand
relativity you would not be able to do
and that made the atom bomb possible I
mean nuclear energy possible made GPS
possible his breakthroughs are you
trying to do a breakthrough that has
headset implications or are you
searching a breakthrough that has get
out of the headset implications both so
what I want to do is is get a theory of
what's beyond at least a baby Step
Beyond the headset
presumably
as I mentioned there's a cantor's
hierarchy of infinity so
we have infinite job security going
beyond the headset that's it's literally
an unending job but to take a step
entirely outside of the headset
then as as you point out as a scientist
I need to make predictions back in the
headset because that's the only place we
can do experiments to prove that you're
to get right well to to I don't you can
never prove that you're right but but to
to sort of what we say science would say
to to get confirmation of your theories
which is not proof but to to say
um
you're not stupid you you seem to be on
the person that's the things that we
already understand that's what hopefully
makes novel predictions about things
that we don't currently understand
that's right we should be able to get
Quantum field Theory back as a special
case we'll get Einstein's theory of
general relativity as a special case uh
evolution of a natural selection as a
special case we should or
generalizations of these theories within
space time so so yes we're we're going
for the first baby step outside of
space-time in terms of a scientific
theory but of course we have to project
it back into space-time where we can do
experiments in a better look
um like evolution of natural selection
and your Quantum field Theory or
understandable generalizations of those
theories um or we're wrong right so so
you might say Well yeah if you go
outside of space-time you can do
anything you have all the fun you're
watching do anything you want to
um no you can't you can you need to tie
it back to what we can perceive inside
our headset
um so that that's where we're headed but
but as I said there's infinite job
security and and so I view myself as as
just looking for a first baby step
outside of the headset science for for
centuries has only studied our headset
because space time is our headset
but in the last 10 years physics has
gone beyond we've talked before about
the amplitohedron and decorative
permutations that other other structures
that physicists are finding these are
not the final word again these are the
first baby steps outside of our headset
and they will be of course refined and
eventually superseded all right so
there's one of these things that I think
I've I've grasped enough that I can
present it to people as one of the first
baby steps so in physics one of the
things they're constantly doing is
smashing particles together to try to
see what happens when those particles
Collide in the hopes that it will reveal
smaller and smaller elements of the
building blocks of the universe which
will then help us understand what the
the sort of fundamental makeup of
space-time is and as they look at this
data what they found is uh that there
are patterns in that data that replicate
endlessly
and you smash these together and the the
collisions there's so much data at first
it seems impossible just uh so much data
to Wade through will never understand
anything and then all of a sudden you
realize wait there's only so many
patterns once you take those like once
you group those shatters like if you
think of it this way if every time you
broke a mirror it broke into the same
pattern you'd be like wait a second and
am I understanding it correctly that
that's what happens when you Collide
particles statistics yes right so it's
not exactly but but you you can use
statistics to show that there are these
statistical commonalities to the
interactions absolutely okay walk us
through that and why does that matter
well for physicists of course this is
some of their most fundamental data so
there what are particles particles
Eugene vigner taught us are what he
called you know irreducible
representations unitary representations
of the group of symmetries of space-time
what they call the point Correa group is
essentially particles are like the
the simplest things allowed
by the
symmetries of space-time the simplest
entities allowed and so in some sense by
studying these particles we're really
studying the nature of space-time itself
in the structure of space-time
and
so when they for example in the Large
Hadron Collider they will smash protons
together or they will um they're they'll
also you know sometimes have an electron
and smash it into a proton at high
energies and when you do that at high
enough energies you destroy the proton
it actually falls apart and you see all
these particles scattering up things
like quarks and gluons and mesons and so
forth and so you can look at the angles
that these particles are spraying out at
and look at for example do they have you
know a spin a magnetic charge what's
their do they have a mass so you can
sort of you can look at all the and then
when when you start looking at all the
data you begin to see patterns in the
data and and so we see you know for
example it was a big surprise to
physicists that inside the proton there
were these things that they now call
quarks but the quarks in some sense at
least at the energies that are available
to us can't
be on their own you can't have like
quarks flying out on their own there's
something called Quark confinement that
was a big big Discovery so quarks like
in in a proton there are three quarks
two up and one down a neutron has two
down and one up
and but if if you
if the quark
escapes it
was trying to get away
um the force of attraction between two
quarks grows
with the distance
and the energy this well the the force
doesn't grow the energy so the force
doesn't normally we think of the force
the force so the force doesn't grow the
force remains constant and so the energy
that can the potential energy it keeps
growing and growing as you as you move
these particles apart and so so at some
point they snap and you you create all
that energy goes and creates a new Quirk
say so so then they pair off
so it's very very strange um this court
confinement thing so one reason we do
experiments is because I mean who
ordered them we we wouldn't have like
guessed uh you know poor confinement and
so but we we found core confinement and
is still being studied I mean trying to
understand that there's a theory that if
we get that really really high energies
um they won't be confined but but those
are energies that um we currently are
nowhere near
and we have no analytic proof right now
of Court confinement for what are called
non-abelian gauge theories so so one of
the big open questions in physics is to
actually prove this analytically
um that that so they they have lattice
gauge models that that of this that show
it and and and and they they have other
cases where they the experiments and the
theory
convince them it's the truth but we
don't actually have the final analytic
proof of this in what's called non-ably
engaged theories so so that's still an
interesting open question but that's why
physicists are doing these particles are
really probing in some sense the
fundamental nature of space-time itself
and so they look at at patterns they
look at that the um the cross sections
for interactions so this was for example
way back
um
in the early studying of the atom so
there was a plum pudding model of the
atom right so there was
electrons where these negative Point
particles inside a um a positive field
and then this one experimenter
started shooting particles at atoms and
the plum model would say that most of
these particles would just go go
straight through and most of them did
but every once in a while one would
bounce back
a very very small percentage of the time
and so that that gave them the idea okay
there are point-like particles we now
would call them protons and and neutrons
these particles that were that they were
hitting that but they were a very very
small space within the the atom so the
atom was mostly empty space the
electrons were way far away so to speak
from the the much smaller protons and
neutrons and so but then we look inside
the protons we find that the proton
itself and the neutrons are composed of
even smaller particles quarks and gluons
and and so forth and who knows even the
quarks and gluons might be you know
composed of smaller particles but we
don't have the resolution in our
colliders right now to test that we can
only go to you know a thousand through
ten thousandth the the
diameter of a proton I think and at that
resolution the quarks and gluons still
look like point-like particles what's up
guys it's Tom bilyu and if you're
anything like me you're always looking
for ways to level up your mindset your
business and your life in general that's
exactly why I started impact Theory a
podcast that brings together the world's
most successful and inspiring people to
share their stories and most importantly
strategies for success and now it's
easier than ever to listen to impact
theory on Amazon music whether you're on
the go or chilling at home you can
simply open up the Amazon music app and
search for impact Theory with Tom bilyu
to start listening right away if you
really want to take things to the next
level just ask Alexa hey Alexa play
impact Theory with Tom bilyeu on Amazon
music
now playing impact Theory with Tom
bilyeu on Amazon music and boom you're
instantly plugged into the latest and
greatest conversations on mindset Health
finances and Entrepreneurship get
inspired get motivated and be legendary
with impact theory on Amazon music let's
do this
it doesn't seem self-evident to me that
just because again I'm granting you the
conceit that Consciousness is the
fundamental thing but it does not seem
self-evident to me that even if
Consciousness is the fundamental thing
that gives rise to this constricting
rule set as I describe it that we call
space time
that you couldn't have a theory of
everything regarding space time
why do you think we have failed to get a
Theory of Everything
in space-time in space-time knowing that
it's the simulation but going back to
Grand Theft Auto feels like even if I
just said oh all I can tell you is cause
and effect that when this pixel goes
here it has this effect and so now I can
play everything's forwards or backwards
and you could in Grand Theft Auto it has
a set of rules and it adheres to those
rules right right period plain and
simple and so even though it is the um
the it is the headset a computer program
assuming that a simulation acts like a
computer program space-time in this case
uh it it adheres to rules and so when
you get a quote over a bug it is what
the program is programmed to do you just
didn't intend to program it that way
well I I in that
framework yes I agree with you that I
think we could get a complete theory of
space-time not a complete Theory of
Everything But a complete theory of
space-time so that's so the theory of
everything for me would be you know
space time was a trivial aspect of
everything right so but but absolutely I
think we can get a complete theory of
space-time and we'll see its limits it
it falls apart at 10 to the minus 33
centimeters and 10 to minus 43 seconds
so we'll we'll see that we'll understand
that yeah so it's it's quite quite
possible I would say though and I like
your idea about the the program and the
rules and setting up a framework in
which you can explore
um experiences I'll throw in a little
wrinkle you're writing computer programs
and um
so Alan Turing you know is sort of one
of the fathers of modern computer
science and and turing machine it was
like the first like really good
theoretical framework for computer
science and the universal turing machine
that that Turing described in some of
his papers
um is sort of our our notion of a
universal computer
but but there's a a well-known limit to
what Turing machines can do take again
all the integers you know one two three
up to Infinity also minus one minus two
and so forth
and ask think about all the functions
from the integers to the integers for
example the square function so you know
the square of two is four the square of
four is 16 and so forth how many
functions are there
it turns out it's a big it's a bigger
infinity
it's it's it's a it's not accountable
and it's not it's a bigger infinity than
the integers
but Turing proved
that the set of computable functions is
countable
so when you're programming
you're using only computable functions
but they're um they're a much smaller
Infinity than all the possible functions
so
right now in our current technology
we're when we build these computer
simulations
we should know that we're using a
probability zero subset of all the
functions that are actually
available and maybe later on we'll
figure out how to do something more
interesting with all these other
functions but then as we go again
counters hierarchy I think that in other
words the the kinds of rules
they're gonna
are going to be very very um
hard for our heads to understand you can
write down if you take a class in
theoretical computer science you can
study non-computable functions so that
you and
almost every function is non-computable
okay because as I just said the
computable functions are probability
zero
the set of all functions is is most most
of those functions are not computable
but in a theoretical computer science
class you will you will actually spend
some time
actually studying you know how to
construct and prove that a certain
function is not not computable like the
halting problem is not is not a
computable is it's not a computable
function it doesn't
and so
but it's really hard for us even though
almost every function is not computable
almost every function we can think of is
computable so here we are stuck with the
limitations of our headset and and so
thinking out of the box in the
simulation idea is is is really going to
be mind-numbing because to really think
out of the box
you can have to learn how to think about
non-computable functions and that is not
trivial that's not but that's so I just
wanted to throw that out there to just
open up how complicated this this could
be and and why the execution to get a
theory of even just the everything of
space-time we have to get into
non-computable functions I don't know if
we will or not that's an open question
but we should be open to that
possibility hmm
very interesting and certainly to
explore Consciousness I see no reason
why we should a priori I would say this
if someone claimed that the computable
functions were all we need I would say
the burden of proof is on you
[Music]
talk about something I have not even
considered I don't know that I can wrap
my head around that one yeah I have a
hard time I mean I took a class and I
looked at that non-computable funding
the halting problem and you have to
really I mean you have to be sober you
have to be well rested and you have to
think really hard at least with my
apparatus you have to think really
really hard to to even grasp it it's not
trivial
intense okay so when we have a
hypothesis it makes predictions we need
to be able to solve we're talking about
this a few minutes ago we need to be
able to solve problems or our hypothesis
needs to predict outcomes of things we
can observe but not yet explain
um
in I can't remember if you mentioned
this in your paper but I've heard you
talk about this so dark matter Dark
Energy we don't know what the hell it is
but we know that the Universe would not
hold together if it wasn't for that or
it wouldn't be racing apart at the way
that is Raising whatever it wouldn't
function the way that it functions now
um
what does your Consciousness as
fundamental agent tell us
about Dark Energy well nothing
specifically right so that's that's a
big open question in fact one one of the
um my collaborators is a student working
right now on Dark Energy
um experiments um
um a brilliant student named Ben nepper
because he thinks it will yield results
tied to Consciousness is fundamental uh
no I think it's just because it's a good
thing to do at this stage in your career
to get that kind of experience and you
know actually spend time hunting with
real experiments for dark matter so you
learn the ropes um I think it's it was
very and so he's doing that um and who
knows you know our current techniques
may or may not find dark matter we we
just don't know but
it's no surprise
from a point of view that says that
space-time is not fundamental
to say that there could be influences
um
on our headset
that are not explicitly represented
by the headset itself they're only
seeing
as influences on the headset but and so
one way that we're going after this in
our own mathematics is
we have this markovian dynamics of these
conscious agents can you take a second
to explain to people what markovian
Dynamics are yeah markovian Dynamics is
is fairly simple in in concept it says
that
um
what you do next
so suppose I'm um suppose I'm a
on just
say a sidewalk and it has
there are different I could either step
one step to the right or one step to the
left
and and there's some probability maybe I
I choose to step to the right with
probability of you know two-thirds and
to the left probability of one-third and
so you can see where where would I go
over time but the key thing about it is
that my the step I'm going to take now
only depends on where I am now so where
I'm going to end up next only depends on
where I am now so there's a finite
memory I don't have to know everything
I've done in the past to know what's
going to happen next I only need to know
where I am now and that's the key Markov
property that you only need to really
know the current state don't have to
know the whole history
to have all the problem all the
information about the probabilities for
what's going to happen
nextology that I heard that I it was
really helpful in understanding is if
you think of it as airports
some airports have more connections to
other cities than other airports you're
so if you're asking let's say that
there's five airports in question one is
isolated and one is a hub to all the
rest and then the other ones only have
one or two links whatever
um
going back to your idea of if I'm on the
isolated uh airport there's only one
option so you don't need to know where I
was before all of that if you know I'm
in the isolated one you know I'm flying
back to the only thing it's connected to
which is the other Hub right now when
I'm at that Hub that has let's say five
options right now it's just a
probability curve of which one I'm going
to go to but since I go to another one
of those airports then it's like okay
well I could go you know to
um Cincinnati I could go to New York I
could go to LA or I could go
um let's say those are the only
connections but when I'm in Hawaii if
Hawaii forces me to route through La
then you know where you're going to go I
was like okay that that at least gives a
simple understanding of oh this is a
relatively simple concept that sets
aside all the history and so from a
computational standpoint that becomes
very important because when people talk
about booting up a simulation of the
universe you very quickly to track every
element that could possibly interact
with every if everything could interact
with everything becomes impossible and
you would have to have a computer the
size of the universe itself in order to
track like a one for one atom basically
um but I think I'm understanding this
right that markovian Dynamics eliminates
a lot of that computational need because
I don't have to there there is a small
set of things and once I know the
probability distribution over time it
completely stabilizes
and so when I I know if I'm at airport C
I know the exact probability of where
they're going to go next that's right so
markovian Dynamics is help simplify
things
um by demanding only a finite memory
instead of an infinite memory of the
past history of what what you've been
doing but you can make the memory as big
as you want so it's really not too much
of a limitation either with like so it's
a nice
why do we care about it
um well most of us don't have to deal
with infinity anyway in terms of past
history so we can only we can just use
finite histories and and that's and
that's
quite good and it another reason um to
be interested in Markov Dynamics is we
talked about computable functions well
markovian
kernels are computationally Universal so
anything that can be computed with a
neural net or with the Turing Universal
turing machine can be computed with
markovian kernels so they form a they
gives a nice Network kind of modeling
for Dynamics but they also give us
Universal computational abilities and
they're not limited to computable
functions because
the
sets on which the probabilities are
defined need not be computable sets so
they actually give us a window toward
going Beyond computation I'm not there
right now but but that window is there
in the future if we need to go there
hopefully that will go there but but so
our our current model is a markovian
model of conscious agents and then what
we have to do is is
we can then show
that space time is just a projection of
this Dynamics and so you only there's a
lot of States really fast before you
move on so just re-anchoring people
that these conscious agents the states
that they can be in are coffee
alation right desire headache
so when we're talking markovian Dynamics
we're talking about moving from one of
those qualia states to another a human
headache versus a dolphin headache et
cetera Etc so
uh
uh help me understand why that's
important that I can like if I'm in the
state of blissed out coffee taste uh
that I have a certain probability of
going somewhere else that that feels
counterintuitive it feels like my wants
and desires are really what's going to
drive the next state
not the state that I'm currently in
that's right so
so now we're just talking about the
Consciousness not about space-time for
for this question yes right so there
um when we write down a markovian kernel
and say okay whatever your conscious
experiences are now this markovian just
Colonel describes what your next
conscious experiences will be
probabilistically and also
um what how you're influencing the
conscious experience of others so so now
we can ask the kind of question you're
asking so if that's happening outside
the headset this is all outside the
headset right this is all this is so the
probability of what I do next is
determined outside the headset by
markovian Dynamics that's why we're
gonna get to this dark energy and dark
matter stuff you are breaking my brain
right now that's so that's that's why I
brought this up is because your question
was about dark energy and dark matter so
what we have to to to get at that from
this point of view what we're going to
say is look most of the states of this
Dynamics are states that are not
represented in space-time
they're dark
so there are these influences that
you're not going to see when you count
up all the matter and all the energy
that you can see inside Space time
you're going to be missing all the stuff
that didn't project into space-time
so in fact probably the dark energy and
dark matter is much more than we've
discovered so far so so that's why it's
important but
so okay hold on this all really does
start to feel weird when I remind myself
that this is about qualia
right the sense of it being like
something and so
I'm gonna make something up uh dark
energy is the energy created this is why
I don't understand how it could be
energy but uh dark energy is the energy
of a qualia that I will never be able to
experience so it's something like an
alien drinking blood wine uh making that
up but it has to be qualia so it's got
to be something to be like that thing is
that right it's it's
even more complicated than that it's
it's not just one qualia it's probably
who knows how many countless Infinity is
like that exactly right that are
interacting and affecting the Dynamics
that we perceive inside of our
space-time headset
but notice that among the qualia are for
example the quality that you are about
four feet from me so your position so
position
there's a quality I mean it's very very
different to experience you four feet
from me than four inches from Max those
are very very so so depth and space is
quality and in fact
um our quality of there sort of
compresses if I look at the like a
distant Mountain
and the moon rising over that mountain
the Moon looks a little further than the
mountain but not much right yeah the
moon's a little further but if you were
to you know that mountain might be you
know 20 miles from me the Moon is a
quarter million miles right so that
means you have no idea that it's like
orders of magnitude
further away so so our qualia space of
depth is quite compressed compared to
what we would might call the measured
world so like when you actually and and
you see that in in your you know like a
Grand Theft Auto when you're actually
looking around you only see the roads
around you in a little bit but the Grand
Theft Auto World you might be able to
drive thousands of miles in a really
complicated simulation you don't see
thousands of miles in any one time you
only see a little bit that your headset
allows you to see but but because you
use that same headset and you're you're
not stuck in that world
you're at there's actually a super
computer that has a much bigger world
than your headset right then what you
see right now in your headset but it's
rendering a little bit in your headset
right now so that's why the the mountain
and the Moon look about the same because
their headset we can now of course
when we go to the moon on a rocket
now it's like going through Grand Theft
Auto with your headset on and going
places that you couldn't see because
they were too far away in your current
headset view but you can get there
eventually and and so that also is
pointing to a world outside of your
headset your headset is just what little
bit of that world that you're rendering
at any one time
now dark energy and darkness you're not
really getting outside of your headset
to go to Mars you're getting outside of
what you rendered previously well so at
any moment you're only seeing in your
headset right but if I go to Mars I'm
still seeing in my headset yeah and in
Grand Theft Auto for example there might
be a you know a Porsche that's you know
a thousand miles away and you're gonna
have to drive like three hours in the
game to get there so you're not going to
see it so it's in the it's in the
simulation outside of your headset right
now to get it in your headset you're
gonna have to do all this work to get it
inside your headset but it already
existed in the software and the computer
prior to that you just don't see it in
your in your headset understood so so
that so all the stuff inside Space time
the galaxies that we see that are far
away from us and so forth but
that's not dark matter dark energy
that's that's more like the headset
stuff that you see in Grand Theft Auto
if you go far enough within the game but
then there's this deeper notion that
there are some states in the computer
that you'll never see in in Grand Theft
Auto but they could uh you know subtly
influence what you are seeing in Grand
Theft Auto doesn't your thesis
necessarily no you're not going to say
yes to this but I'm going to finish
doesn't your thesis necessarily mean
that that is some element of uh the I
like to think of it as a blob that is
consciousness cycling through
[Music]
um
why would it be in the same simulation
cycling through different qualia uh but
then I don't understand why it would be
in the same simulation if it's going to
be something that could never possibly
interact with right I mean almost
everything that the real Consciousness
is doing is not in our in our headset we
have this what we're perceiving is
probabilities zero of what's going on
it's it's basically if you ask of all
the things that are being experienced in
Consciousness what percent of it do we
experience zero percent
zero percent yes understood but
I I am in a way experiencing Dark Energy
because it is the thing that makes the
universe the way that it is now so I'm
just trying to understand so the thing
that I that I'm sort of debating in my
own head is okay when I grant you that
Consciousness is fundamental then
there's all this internal logic to
um the space-time Continuum that I know
and love right but I don't know that
it's the only way for me to apply the
sort of same ration now that you use of
whether it's markovian Dynamics girdle's
incompleteness theorem is probably the
more important because that's the one
that really helps me understand Ai and
what AI is doing
um
so I'm wondering okay if I for a second
say you you have touched on something
that's really important which is that
space time is the simulation
but I don't need to draw the conclusion
that Consciousness is the fundamental
thing that just becomes a debate about
whether Consciousness can emerge or not
um it could be that there and this feels
more right to me when I try to imagine
it but I fully admit what I'm about to
say simply pushes God farther down it it
kicks the can so what feels intuitive to
me because it's what I'm doing is that I
exist in somebody else's simulation that
exists in the real world
and that person they still need God or
something I have not in any way shape or
form explain that I've clicked again but
then all the sort of
there's a set of rules they seem like
they're a little too perfect they're a
little too finely tuned you've got the
Fermi Paradox which I'll probably ask
you about later like all these things
are like this is a little sus the way
that this whole space time is trying to
hang together just doesn't really quite
complete the circle including the
so much of the energy that makes the
universe work is as dark stuff don't
worry about that feels like a 13 year
old programmer hand waving it away
telling the teacher like ah I just
needed something in order to you know
make all of this work and when I do that
everything also falls into place where
I'm like oh wow okay so I get how
they're rendering all this in real time
using the same principles and I'm now
seeing AI use pulling things out of the
possibility space because as somebody
developing a video game I'll just tell
you the hardest thing is creating the
art assets so they need something that
can render this stuff on the Fly and and
creating the art assets that look good
but are also optimized for the rendering
engine because the rendering engine just
gobbles resources so it's like when I
take that view and instead of going
there's this magical thing called
Consciousness I'm like I'm still dealing
with God there's a God somewhere doing
something whatever there's a thing I
don't understand but
space-time being born of a 13 year old
just trying to like you could literally
go to the Unreal Engine store and be
like give me Einstein's physics right
and you plunk them in and it would work
he wouldn't even have to know how to
program it right he just took it well
you know whatever give me what they
understood in 2023 and I was driving in
right you know we'll see what happens
like that still works so I agree what is
it that gives you the confidence that
the thing that is giving birth to all of
this is consciousness itself oh I'm not
confident at all so everything is your
leading theory it's just my leading
theory why is it your leading theory um
first I would agree with you that we
could just say that there are some kind
of dynamical entities outside of
space-time
and and B agnostic about the nature of
those entities just write down their
Dynamics and then show how it projection
to space time and we could be good
absolutely the reason I'm going after
Consciousness is
um two things very personal first I mean
we all have headaches and we have
conscious experiences
um and so we want to understand what
Consciousness is right and and the
standard view right now among my
colleagues in the neurosciences is that
Consciousness is
um something that's created by brain
activity or embodied brains or perhaps
if we're lucky ai's and so forth but
physics is fundamental physical stuff is
fundamental and Consciousness is a late
car
if space-time is doomed if space-time is
not fundamental that whole story of
Consciousness is out the window
is it is does physicality go out the
window let me see if I can answer my own
question using your words to see if I
understand this is physicality out the
window if space time is doomed you would
say yes because local realism is proven
that it isn't there is no local realism
that all of this is fake everything you
see in experience it's all just quote
unquote rendered in real time right as
you engage with it therefore at least
in what we experience because local
realism isn't true physicality cannot be
true
that's that's right to put it very
simply I don't have neurons right now
if you looked inside my skull you would
see neurons you would render them but
there are no neurons
right so neurons do not exist when
they're not perceived so neurons
couldn't create Consciousness because
they're not even there to do it and
NorCal particles you know particles
don't exist when they're not perceived
here's where limited Minds like mine get
tripped up
because your analogy is so profound and
feels so right and for this to be a
simulation I say to myself something has
to be running the simulation and I can't
get myself outside of that something
somewhere is going to be physical
that's a hard one for me too by the way
I have all the same knee-jerk emotional
reactions that everybody else has to
this stuff even stronger
um so maybe that's why it's good for
someone like me to be doing this because
you know I don't my emotions don't
believe any of this they don't believe
it at all it's literally only the
mathematics pushing me kicking and
screaming at each step to decide you
have to go with mathematics and what
what the theories are saying but I don't
find it that intuitive maybe I will at
some point um but I don't find it that
intuitive
so so yeah you could say you know we
don't need to talk about Consciousness
there's just some dynamical entities
outside of space-time but can't
Consciousness be a part of the
simulation
it may you know for all I know it it may
be I mean so maybe there's things I
called awareness
for this prior to any particular
conscious experiences now now there I'm
completely in over my head I have no
idea what to say about that thing right
I literally have nothing intelligent to
say what if awareness is just the qualia
of being rendered of your process being
run by the Central Computer
that's as good an ideas as I've ever had
but but I don't feel very confident in
this area at all I mean the closest we
can personally get is the kind of thing
I suggested you know go into a quiet
room turn off the light
let go of thought which is not easy let
go of everything and try to just be
aware of awareness be aware of being
aware and and try to sit there with that
and what you find is it's a it's a
profound experience the war you just sit
there being aware of awareness without
without thinking about you know you're
not see the whole point about not
thinking is thinking you're back into
this small computational Realm
you're back into this really tiny out of
all the infinities
you're you're back in this little tiny
Infinity so letting go so this is not we
know the headset is computation though
right well we don't know for sure our
current models are but but we haven't
proven local realism not being real
mean that it has to be computational no
it doesn't tell I mean so it doesn't
entail that at all no huh now I'm broken
again how to make sense of that right so
so
um how can anything
how this is interesting here's my base
where I realize I don't know how to
escape this uh I feel like for qualia 2
exist it must be processed
I will even grant that the processing is
simply the markovial Dynamics of
markovian dynamics of moving from one
thing to another the switching of States
fine but it it is moving from one state
to another which I will call that
processing right yes just not a physical
process it's it's it's go and it doesn't
have to be a computational process even
it could be functions that are not
computational yeah so I try not to kill
the audience with the things I just
can't remember well it hurts me too I'm
telling you these things but not because
it's easy for me my my head hurts too
thinking about this do you have an
example of something that that's
non-computational I think you gave one
earlier but I forget well so
um the the standard story that you if
you take a computer science class and
exist study the theory of computation
they'll tell you about something called
the halting problems so this is the like
one of the big problems that entering I
believe posed it and and and showed that
it was not computational the question is
this if you your turing machine is like
a a universal turing machine is is like
a universal computer you can give it a
program during thought about putting a
tape with with some punches on it
essentially so you have this tape reader
and the turing machine would look at one
square in the tape and read that symbol
and then it would change State and then
move left to right and write a symbol
and that's that's all the universal
training machine could do and and so the
question that Turing asked was
um suppose
we asked the question
um
will the turing machine
stop after a finite number of moves will
it halt
um on
the arbitrary sets of these tapes that
you're giving it new programs that's
called the halting problem will the
question is is there a turing machine
that can decide so is there an algorithm
that can decide whether this turing
machine will halt or not for any
particular given input so can you tell
the touring machine to stop is that the
well well no so so I should say one more
thing about Turing machines so a turing
machine is going back and forth and
changing at State and when it's done
when it actually is like computed the
square of a number or whatever it is
that it's doing it it halts it goes into
what's called a halt statement so that
when it goes into a whole state that
means it's done it it did the
computation
so but but there are some computations
that go on arbitrarily long
like I don't understand why you they you
never come to the end you you'd never
come to the end of it there's some sort
of recursive Loop yeah that's why it's
nature in fact probably most so the
question is so when you say
non-computationally you mean something
that ends up in that Loop yeah where you
where the turing machine never halts you
give it an input whatever things it's
done and it never thinks it's done
so the halting problem most things are
like that yeah I would guess
um that
yeah most tapes are are probably you
wouldn't halt be my guess but but that's
that's not an important Point here I
think that's the case but it's not a
central point that the fact is that many
won't halt
and so the so the question that during
race was something like this so is there
a turing machine
that can tell you if it says give them
given this turing machine and all these
inputs whether this turing machine which
on which one of these inputs will it
halt
okay
and it turns out that there's no turing
machine that can do that
so it's not a computer machine that will
know which one is going to Halt that
there's no turing machine that can tell
you that whether this other turing
machine will halt or not on all these
inputs interesting so it can never
understand it without running the
calculation itself well and the turing
machine itself would never halt the one
that was trying to do this would never
halt so it's called the halting problem
and and it's it's so when you take a
computer science class you'll get a much
better explanation that I've just given
you but basically it's it you'll see
that um there's no algorithm that will
tell you
whether a particular turing machine will
halt or not on any particular any
possible inputs is so when somebody says
it's touring complete does it mean that
it halts appropriately or is that
something else entirely
that's something else entirely got it
okay that's uh that's crazy
um
persistence yes so this is I think I I
think a key part of my thesis which is
persistence is the hard problem for AI
right now and when I look at the thing
that holds AI back from being something
that people can Implement into their
workflows today it's because it can give
you really amazing stuff but it cannot
give you really amazing stuff over and
over from different angles and different
setups people are working on it and you
know by the time this comes out I'm sure
it'll be even better and a year from now
it'll it'll be a solved problem but that
feels like part of the rule set that you
need inside of the headset is to create
this sense of persistence
um
so I wonder if again going back to the
idea of the headset becomes necessary
because you have to create persistence
in order for the qualia to be explored
you have to have that
do you agree with that sense of
persistence being a necessary tool of
Consciousness to explore qualia
um well first I'll just say I think the
concrete example of the persistence is
like I look up at the Moon
and then I look away and I say is the
moon still there and you look up and you
say oh yeah the Moon is still there and
then then you look away and I look and
then so every time I look back I still
see the moon where I expect to see it
that's that's what we mean by
persistence here and I don't think that
we need to have that kind of persistence
to have a headset I think we do we have
that but for example
um
there's
E coli bacteria do I understand what
I've read is that it swims along
and
um there's some amino acid or something
that is eating and as long as there's a
good gradient of that thing it keeps
going in the direction it's going and
eating the stuff but all if things start
going South and it's not getting the
amino acid or whatever it is it's eating
um it's it's flagellum that it's using
to to move forward it turns it in the
other direction it which makes it it's
like a random turn so it just rotates
the other way and it gives it like a
random new so it's like a random
orientation generator
it orients is a completely new
generation a new Direction and then it
starts going and if it's good then it
goes and so that's a search it's a very
stupid but
it works for the E coli now does it have
what does E coli necessarily have
persistence I don't know you yeah 100
okay must okay so
um right before we started rolling I had
the very good fortune of introducing you
to another one of my favorite people
Eric Weinstein and
um
one of the things that he said to you
was that
um you said I don't have neurons and he
was like what and he had earlier made a
statement that you couldn't
because you had never met him before
there's no way for you to render him
upon entrance because he remained
consistent to himself to me and that's
what I mean by persistence so if I look
at E coli let's say I'm the first person
to discover it it will look a certain
way if somebody else without knowing I
discovered it also discovers it it will
look the same way
if a person well I agree with you on
that my question was different from E
coli's perspective I was thinking
through the headset of E coli what so E
coli has its own headset
and I'm just wondering for E coli see it
may not need to have this persistence
notion because all it needs to know I'm
happy I'm eating wow so this is the
importance of uh defining terms so what
I mean by persistence is that you will
look the same so when you look up at the
moon and then look away and it gets
trash Bend and your headset and then you
ask me is this still there and I look up
and I'm like yeah it's still there
every time I look at the moon it's going
to be the same every time you look at
the moon it's going to be the same and
if somebody were to take a photo of that
we would both recognize that photo as
being accurate no I I completely agree
with all that if I'm building out a
simulation I don't go uh here is marker
for Moon represented differently to you
but consistently represented differently
for me but consistently I go make the
moon persistent the moon will always
look like this and that way no matter
who discovers it they would describe it
the same they would see it the same like
rather than me have to be like oh you're
calling it red and I have to remember
the red is different for this guy and so
it's like how do you know that red is
the same if this is all simulation it's
obviously the same because otherwise you
would have to like program the like
a thousand different ways now you may
experience uh like additional layer of
sentiment about a thing that makes the
qualia different and this sort of gets
into your hierarchies of infinity
that fine but going back to neurons ones
if I smash somebody's head a million
years ago maybe that's too far because
the brains change a hundred thousand
years ago neurons would look the same
even though I don't know what they are
I'm just like meh that's when you smash
ahead this is what you see if I smash
that same head today I'm going to see
the same thing because even if this is
all a simulation there is a level of
persistence and I completely agree with
you on that I was just raising the
question could we come up with a game
that was so simple
it was so trivial that in some sense
persistence was irrelevant I mean you
you either are you're told bad or good
that's all you're told bad or good and
you do something random that's that's
what I'm saying the E coli you're
talking now about Behavior okay which is
right so if if we're in agreement on
persistence no I agree on the
persistence the um just to say it
another way the simulation is a set of
rules descriptions assets like art
assets for just an easy way to explain
it and so there's going to be uniformity
across everything that uses the headset
they're all going to be the same because
I don't have to like create all these
individual things I agree yeah then you
have a very separate notion which is the
behaviors we were talking about this
earlier this still really
um I don't know how to understand it
in your paper and it's probably a good
time to now get into the paper so the
paper felt like as a layperson who's
interacted with you in an interview
format but never having
um I had your book but again that was
more inviting people into uh Popular
Science whereas the paper was like deep
mathematics uh felt like a step forward
in your guys's certainty of at least how
to explain what you think
um but one of the ideas in the paper is
this action potential I don't I can't
remember if that's how you described it
but um so I want to go back to this idea
of the and this is where I sort of
started thinking this makes more sense
to me as a 13 year old programming set
of rules than it does uh Consciousness
giving birth to a set of limitations in
order to experience qualia because then
every computation has to be about qualia
which I may have said earlier but I want
to I want to say something that I think
you actually state in the paper okay
if this really is consciousness is the
fundamental layer
and all Consciousness is trying to do is
run the girdles in completeness serum
against all of the qualia that it could
experience
and that the headset and our biological
experience which is really just the
thing inside the headset are simply
constraints for it to express qualia all
math is
all math is
is the representation of the different
elements of qualia so whether that's
probability of given Behavior
likelihood of moving from one thing to
another one state to another that's all
math is here to compute
and in the paper you touch on I'm
calling action potential but that could
be my poor memory
yeah
um I feel like I have free will I think
it's an illusion but I feel like I have
free will
but all of this qualia if it is true
that that's what's really happening and
this is just Consciousness running
through all the different qualia doesn't
feel like that to me so there's some
element of uh the simulation
that makes it feel like I'm living a
life
and that the quality is born out of me
living a life
not born out of I don't live a life so
that I can experience qualia
but your hypothesis I think mandates
that my life is the consequence of
cycling through qualia and not the other
way around and that's the markovian
Dynamics of the likelihood of me going
from this state to that state that
dictates that that forces my life is
that accurate well
not quite so it's it's there's this
complicated dynamics of Consciousness
going on and and
the coin of the realm of our experiences
and and that's that's the hypothesis so
the experiences are are being
shared and triggered think like the
twitterverse right you know but what
you're tweeting our experience is what
you're receiving our experiences the
Consciousness must break into a just
metric ton of separate entities for
this to work that's right so and so
we're gonna have this it's like
um
the Twitter versus is huge millions of
users and so forth if you look at my
Twitter page right there's only a small
number of people following me into a
small number that I'm following so I'm
getting a tiny picture of Twitter I'm
pretty so the there there's a big social
network a lot going on if you look at
the projection onto Hoffman's little
things it's just a small little and if
you if that's all you saw you wouldn't
get a feel for what's everything that's
going on in twitterverse because I have
very specific interests I mean you'd
think that everybody likes Consciousness
and Mathematics and is a geek and and
they're not so so you'd get the wrong
picture about what really is is the
twitterverse and so I would think that
all the headsets are just projections
like taking the twitterverse onto one
person's Twitter account their
projections onto you know a consistent
as you point out the the
to keep persistence you might want to
have a whole group of them that see the
same thing and and can both agree that
you all agree that there's a red Porsche
or something like that in the game so so
you could have a bunch of them that have
similar projections of of the one bigger
conscious Dynamics
um
oh maybe I should just stop there and
see if that's addressed your question or
it has not yet so what I'm trying to
figure out is about action so I feel
like I'm living my life oh am I actually
making a choice yeah like what what do
you think
does my life arise out of
um
me taking action and having wants and
Desires in fact that's probably the base
way
I would predict based on how it feels
that the 13 year old because I I
probably make that my things fit better
for me if I just assume that you've got
a 13 year old who pulled um Einstein
physics off the shelf to put into the
program and and they're just running it
based on a set of rules but it doesn't
really matter but we get to here's
here's how it feels that I was given a
set of wants and desires and here's
where Evolution comes in so I want to
survive long enough to have kids that
have kids and then everything in my life
is just an echo of that it's like a
hilariously limited amount of rules that
you have to give to me uh sort of Base
around how I stay alive
the desire to stay alive
um what I want to quench hunger thirst
sexual desire so on and so forth uh and
then you just let me go and when you
when you think of like a human as as a
character in a video game has certain
stats so you marry those wants and
desires with those stats and then you
just let them go and you see who they
bump into and oh you're a childhood
trauma and so that's gonna that's gonna
change your stats but it's like you just
watch how all that plays out and so you
get and I think this is why people are
really going to struggle with this isn't
an emergent phenomenon because all like
when I think about building the game I'm
just beating it into the head of the
team we want the community to create
emerging phenomena that rises out of the
nature of the rule set and the
Technologies right so I'm not trying to
create the emerging phenomena and then
hope that the technology is born of that
which is basically what you're pitching
I think and so I can get behind it when
I think oh this is just uh
girdles incompleteness theorem so
there's an infinite number of things to
cycle through and as long as I grant you
that Consciousness for whatever reason
has a desire to cycle through all of
that then everything does make sense it
plugs in and it works
but then I'm like wait the only part of
that that then I don't know how to
conceptualize because it could just be
that I'm trapped in my headset and I
just I'm not thinking about it right but
what I don't know how to conceptualize
is that
I am living a life and so to your point
that whatever exists outside of the
headset has got to explain what's in the
headset and I am living my life I'm not
just cycling from random qualia to
qualia to qualia
the qualia that I experience seem mapped
so perfectly to the actions that I take
which are clearly influenced by how I
feel that I get but it manifests as
I'm feeling tired therefore I go to bed
therefore I have the experience of the
softness of the sheets uh versus the
Consciousness saying to itself I would
like to cycle through the softness of
sheets now so either this is the
Consciousness has like an agenda and it
knows how to create the simulation in a
way that's going to yield the best
outcome and so it like sat there like oh
what would be the best way like how
it creates humans in the way that it
creates humans it creates life in the
way that creates life it creates day
night cycle which already creates like
so many limitations on us and shapes our
fundamental Evolution and all of that
I'm just like do you really believe
that's Consciousness that
all that in motion
or is that emergent phenomena out of a
simpler thing that
Consciousness like if Consciousness just
gave birth to the laws of physics then
I'd be like word this all makes sense
Consciousness just becomes God fair
enough
um
but if Consciousness in your explanation
is anything other than God I think I'm
confused
so
great great question on the Free Will
and then the nature of the origin of
this headset and is it just all
pre-programmed or is there room for
exploration
that's not quite what I'm saying what
I'm saying is I know it's pre-programmed
because the headset which you have
agreed with has a set of rules right
well yeah that it does have a well a set
of probabilistic rules yes but to get
there you need rules you need rules of a
probability you need to add a minimum
math absolutely right so something
somewhere either math is fundamental or
Consciousness created math as a way to
create a set of rules in order to
experience qualia which that is hard to
wrap your head around but right so that
is that assumption correct
that assertion I think is a better way
is that assertion correct I'm not sure
this is these are deep Waters now so
that's why I'm myself now having some
difficult trouble so I would say the the
Free Will question first I
when I look at our mathematics
I could interpret the markovian kernel
for a given agent as representing the
free will
choice of that agent I could I could
interpret it that way
and it but if I do that I look at all
the others and it's being
affected by all the other conscious
agents and you can so my probability
space is being impacted by the other
conscious agents that's right but but
you could say this is my just my quality
are being com but my free will is not
but but here's the the trick is that
groups of conscious agents
that satisfy certain conditions are also
a conscious agent so
so that means if I think about all the
individual smaller agents as having free
will then this new agent also has if I
think about having free will I would
need to have a new notion of free will
that that's
really quite an interesting one it's
going to be a scale in some sense a
scale free notion of free will that can
go for for what is a scale free to be
true at all scales no matter how many
conscious agents I put together to make
a big conscious agent I would still be
able to talk about this agent has free
will but all of the constituents also
have their own free will
my guess is that that might be able to
be made to work so that the question is
you know if I say is it only the one big
Consciousness that has free will and
we're all puppets or do all the little
consciousnesses have free will the
answer might be both but but you're
going to have to but there'll be this
new mathematics that that shows in some
sense that the Free Will of the one is
made of all the genuine Free Will
choices of the individuals
and and so it's not like
I I
autocratic God saying You must do this
it's it's it's rather a god exploring
all of its own possibilities so to speak
freely
um through all of the components that
which are also freely act interacting
but their free interactions are all part
of the one freedom of of the one in
other words I think that there could be
a mathematically consistent notion of
free will that doesn't say either or but
both and
so we get this scale-free notion but I
haven't written it down yet but that's
why I'm I'm saying that these are deep
Waters and and this is where we're going
to have to to answer your question we're
gonna have to go after some deep
mathematical theories of what we mean by
by free will my guess is that it's
possible but but we'll have to see that
we could have genuine Free Will at the
smaller agent level
um and that's not incompatible with Free
Will at higher levels and even the Free
Will of of whatever the super I mean I
can't even describe the the one agent it
transcends any mathematical description
um so we could we could never actually
get this mathematical model in the final
limit that I'm describing but could we
get it in in
smaller Infinities that we can deal with
and and show that it works there we
can't get to alef Infinity but we can go
maybe in smaller Infinities and see if
it works there and get some hint
ultimately I mean the reason why I said
I'm in deep Waters is because I know
that ultimately I can't answer you
ultimately I can't get to a final
description of the one agent I mean it
literally our mathematics says it
transcends in the description so I have
to Halt and say I can't tell you
I can only tell you about projections of
that one
and the from the projections the
mathematics points to the one
but I
our analytical tools fail us we can't
actually go there can you walk me
through how the data how the projections
point to the one
and the one being like a the one God
Consciousness it's like a thing yes well
again I that's a good question because I
mean I'm not saying that the data we
have uniquely determined this Theory
right absolutely not so I would say they
Point me as a scientific theorist toward
this this hypothesis here I am with
conscious experiences interacting with
others that I think have conscious
experiences my physicalist framework
can't explain them at all and so I'm
proposing that there are these conscious
experiences that give rise to space-time
as a interface and when I write down the
most simple mathematical model that I
can do for that all of a sudden that
mathematics I wasn't intending it but
the mathematics points to a single
major Consciousness that I can never
describe
so so that's the sense in which I say it
was sort of pointed
pointed to that and I would guess that
other conscious agents with either
interfaces that are not even like our
space-time interface but but have
mathematical skills
um and are looking coming up against the
limits of their own interface and
starting to realize Oh I thought this
was real but this is just the interface
might
under the hypothesis the Consciousness
is fundamental might run into the same
thing and then get pointed by their own
mathematics
to to a universal Consciousness
um like but but again this is these are
deep Waters and I'm not secure here
at all but I would say that the free I
mean I've have good discussions like
with Annika Harris and so forth about
about Free Will and uh Free Will is a
standardly understood probably not but
free will in this new sense in which I'm
saying that there could be a scale-free
notion and a new mathematical model of
free will to scale free quite possibly
there and to your point about
um
it's not dictated there's exploration
real exploration going on I I would
again agree
that there's real to the extent that I'm
talking about all these little agents
having their genuine free will there's
there's genuine real exploration going
on even though it's not contradiction to
say as well that the one has has the
free will
see in other words in some cases when we
think about things we think it has to be
this or that but when we look at it more
closely we realize that there's a deeper
way of thinking about it in which both
can be true and we hadn't thought about
it that way
okay so if those are deep Waters I'm
going to drag you to the bottom of the
Marianas Trench click on this one
um
does Consciousness have
a
form
um
I would say awareness
has no form but assumes
all sorts of conscious forms
does
I'm trying to sneak up on an idea here
and I'm not sure the right way to ask
this but
it's like when you talk about
the headset
is a simulation
born of
the born of Consciousness itself it is
emergent from Consciousness right
because the headset is so specific and
acts in a very specific way and as I
think about Ai and the way it pulls
images forth out of the possibility
space
it does it in a certain way and you can
create different kinds of AI that do it
in slightly different ways and they
yield different outcomes and so for the
headset that we all experience to be the
way that it is it requires Consciousness
to be a certain way
and so what I'm trying to get to is when
there is no physicality how does it ever
become a certain way because the way
that Consciousness could act would have
to pull from a probability space
but if I'm right about that then math
comes before consciousness
and if I'm wrong about that I don't
understand what sets Consciousness
moving in a specific Direction
well I think that there are countless
ways that Consciousness can can create
headsets and it does them all
and so one thing that we have to do to
to answer your question and I'm very
interested to do this but it's going to
be hard work is to actually use the
markovian
framework of conscious agents and
actually write down a dynamical system
of conscious agents that constructs our
space-time framework our space-time
headset right so that's how would you
because if there is an infinite number
of potential headsets how would you
begin to narrow it down to the headset
we actually well so what we're going to
have to do is is is think about a a
really
large dynamical system
of conscious agents which will never be
close to the big one that we really need
to get to so we're all we'll always be
starting with a system that's big for us
but trivial compared to the one but
that's all we can do as scientists so
I'll have to start with something that's
big for me
and and then show that it has its own
Dynamics which is quite complicated now
I'm going to make a smaller headset
projection of it using part of the
agents that are available in it to to
create that so there'll be maybe maybe
I'll have like a trillion agents
the interacting but I
arranged for the Dynamics of say a
billion of them
to be creating a particular space-time
headset
and then what I would do so so I know
because markovian kernels are
computationally Universal I can do that
I can use the whole language of of
conscious agent Dynamics to create a
projection into it like a space-time
headset I know that is their
computational Universal so I can do that
now the question is once I've got that
dynamical system and I have
some of the agents creating this headset
what happens when I turn that headset
and have it look at
the whole agent system and in particular
the part of the system that creates that
headset so I'm taking a bunch of agents
in their Dynamics is creating a
space-time interface but now I use the
interface to look back at the only thing
that's available which are agents that's
all that's available to look at but I
want to look at the agents that were
particularly interested that were
involved in the creation of the
interface what will that set of Agents
look like
they'll look like neurons and brains
in other words why would they need to
look like neurons and brains well for us
for for that's another in other words
I'm saying
I thought they didn't map like that
um
remember neurons are just artifacts of
the of the interface they're symbols in
the interface yeah but pulling from our
earlier interviews and so we definitely
haven't talked about it this time but
maybe your thinking has changed or maybe
I misunderstood your thinking previously
but it was my understanding I think I
was asking you specifically about the
moon and I was like but there's
gravitational
concerns it can't not represent
something underlying and you said Tom
you're you're making a mistake this is
all a simulation gravity is a simulation
the Moon is a simulation you don't need
the moon there to simulate gravity to
move Tides or whatever they can just be
program rules and that's just how it
happens and I was like whoa so why then
would the the things that create
Consciousness and thinking look like
neurons in my brain it doesn't seem like
they would need to map like that well
right so the moon doesn't need to exist
but but there's going to be a systematic
relationship between the symbols in your
headset and whatever the software is
right there's going to be a systematic
relationship between them
so
that tells me God I'm really trying to
guess are you going to say this that
tells me I know this is wrong because I
know you don't believe in this but that
tells me that there is physicality to uh
Consciousness that wherever it is that
there is some parallel representation
but that for there to be a
physical God am I help I I can keep
making guesses but I know that I'm
hitting dead ends of things that you
disagree with so what am I getting wrong
right now yeah I'm not sure yet
um so keep guessing then so okay
um what I'm trying to figure out is for
the for there to be a corollary of
producing Consciousness to actually look
like neurons or that I'm hung up on the
word look like okay will it actually
look like neurons well so Consciousness
won't look like neurons but the
uh one could bill put it this way you
could build an interesting interface
such that when the interface looks back
at the whole conscious agent Network
that created it
it would see that as as if it were
neurons and brains in projection I mean
so I'm not saying that's all projection
it's all projection so I'm not saying
it's necessary but I'm saying I could
easily see making that happen so when we
look when we in the headset smash a
brain look at neurons we are seeing the
representation of what is going on at a
deeper level
outside of space-time or a deeper deeper
level of the simulation outside of
space-time which is a deeper level of
the simulation right it's it's in I hope
we're using language the same way
probably not but you're much more
comfortable with that it's that things
are not physical even outside the
outside of space-time I see it as it's a
maybe different set of rules or
something but that it's still physical
but I accept that well there are rules
so I'm there there are there are going
to be rules uh maybe physical I mean you
know made out of matter inside space and
time that's what I mean by physical
something that's you know made out of
particles in space and time yeah why
hypothesis the conscious agents are not
inside space and time at all so they're
not physical in that sense they are rule
governed and I can say that they exist
even if I don't perceive them I could
say that they they exist whereas stuff
in the headset is only there when I
render it
um some maybe we're not disagreeing I I
and I'm not saying it's necessary that
when you look use your headset to look
at the agents that create the headset
that you will necessarily see neurons
I'm saying that we could easily set up a
situation or with some effort we could
set up a situation in which that was the
case
um
in other cases you might see only a
single neuron for example if you're a
very simple thing or or some some other
structure
um
depends on the nature of your interface
but for for an interface like ours
so another way to put it is here's what
I think neurons are
neurons are our interface looking at the
conscious agents that are constructing
our interface
that's what neurons are they're the
interface symbols
headset symbols that our headset gets
when it looks at the conscious agents
that are constructing the headset hmm
that's what's up okay so I asked a
variant of this question earlier but I
don't think we ever got to the answer so
if as we make all these breakthroughs
um would you stay inside the headset if
you
if you could you there were two paths
before you path number one is you
completely exit the headset and uh
inside the the game World the simulation
you your avatar Falls over and basically
appears Dead uh but you are now like out
chilling with the Consciousness or you
return to the Consciousness is maybe you
become aware of your Oneness with the
consciousness
that feels like the right way to sum up
the way you see it yes yeah I think that
that ideas is
um
can't be dismissed out of hand I think
it's a very interesting idea and I don't
have a better one right now so so yes it
the it feels to me like
um
I'm not my body my body is just an
avatar if you're in virtual reality you
do feel that no I would well I think
that I'll say that I'm very much
attached to my body and if something
hurt my body I would I would be panicked
and so forth so so I don't feel like I'm
not my body absolutely but but when I'm
you know thinking intellectually and
coolly about things if something
actually happens to me if I'm in a car
wreck it's a different story but but
just thinking intellectually about it
and maybe if I meditated more I would
actually feel that way but but I don't
um
but just intellectually
it seems
I don't know I'll have to I'll just
leave it that then yeah so I I asked
that part of it because what I'm really
trying to get to is if you could return
to Oneness with Consciousness or stay in
The Matrix but be like Neo where now you
know how to bend it to your will would I
which which would you prefer
well my my guess is
at death
we take off the headset
and
maybe we lose a lot of stuff that was in
the headset
but we don't
but we're still aware
we're but we're we're just not
tacked into the headset anymore
um that's my my best guess uh and so
there I'm completely open to being wrong
deeply wrong but you know there are
near-death experiences that that may or
may not point to that kind of thing that
people have I'm going to be doing being
part of a um
I'm part of a film where they discuss
near-death experiences and so I talk
about that possibility in the film from
from this point of view
um and and so so if I were a physicalist
it's real clear they're you know
if the brain is somehow creating
Consciousness then when the brain is
dead there's no consciousness this other
view that says consciousness
creates space-time and brains as just
headsets has opened to it that
um
my Consciousness where I put mine quotes
the Consciousness that's looking through
this Avatar
um does not
perish when the Avatar perishes that
that's certainly open to this point of
view that's not what motivated the point
of view but it but it certainly is
um open to it so intellectually I'm open
to that point of view emotionally
I fear death so even though the
intellectually it seems quite reasonable
um I have the darwinian fear of death
that's this wired into me and me that's
part of the part of the game
so there's two buttons before you one
rejoin the constant and let's say for
now that really is what happens so you
would maintain a sense of awareness but
all of your sense of self is gone
forever
um or you stay in The Matrix knowing
that it's fake knowing that you're in
the headset but you have special powers
which button do you press
um I I would probably go for the new
stuff I would probably
three dimensions of space one dimension
of time feels quite confining to me I
feel like we got a cheap headset
and then this is a fairly cheap
simulation that we're in and I would
love to see what else is on offer for
example when I'm trying to solve these
some mathematical problems I can imagine
a three-dimensional shape but I can't
imagine a four-dimensional shape and we
had to do some of the problems we're
solving we have to look at the
geometries of things in six or nine or
more dimensions and we can't just sort
of imagine it and and figure out what's
going on we we have to crawl our way up
to the geometry by theorem proof theorem
proof we actually have to prove our way
one so we're like Blind Men filling the
elephant with theorems and proofs to
understand the geometry I would love to
have a headset where I could just see
in a glance everything about
nine-dimensional space and you can't do
that with our current headset and why
stop at nine Dimensions why not be able
to just see in 30 or a thousand or a
billion Dimensions do you though think
that inherent in the way that you think
about that it still requires you to be
you because I'll think about this a lot
if you've ever seen the movie Freaky
Friday all right uh I think about this a
lot with my wife like I really really
want to change bodies with her for 24
hours so that she can see what it's like
to be me and I can see what it's like to
be her I think I'd be a much better
husband if I really understood probably
slowly but the reality is the second you
change bodies I would be her right and
she would be me there wouldn't be her as
me me as her right and so I my even if
you're right here's what I think would
happen if you when you take off the
headset the headset is everything you
think of as you and that even if you're
right that you can meditate your way to
moments like that where you're just pure
awareness
um one if you're right all that the
Consciousness lives to do is cycle
through other qualias so you would
either be reincarnated meaning that you
would just pop back up in a new headset
because that's what the Consciousness is
meant to do is cycle through all this
qualia and so you would re-fragment
yourself back off you would pop up you'd
be reincarnated you'd live life again
or you would return to the Borg The
Beehive the ant colony however you want
to think about it you would be
reinstantiated as just pure awareness
and all of that loving and clinging and
hating and attachment and Precious
Moments and distance and all that poof
gone
and
I find that when people explore these
ideas from a religious perspective
they are forgetting that they're mired
in the gruesome reality of The Human
Experience and that to transcend that
and be in heaven for instance and never
experience pain again or whatever you
would be so different you wouldn't
recognize or relate to anybody in the
same way and so I have yet to hear any
Theory whatsoever other than
um
regrowing your biological organs where
you actually end up cheating death
everything else is you die all of the
things you love poof go away maybe
you're exchanging them for something
better but make no mistake
everything goes away
well
these are deep Waters again but here's
here's another take on it and that is
that
if you and I are just the one
looking at itself through avatars
the one is learning whatever it needs to
learn through these avatars and that's
not lost on the one it is
now part of the one that that's in some
sense eternal
and so the reason I would in given the
choice that you're asking me to make
here uh um my own
predilection would be to say let's go
for something entirely different now
because in some sense that that
partly partly because I'm inquisitive
and I would like to what is it like to
live in a five-dimensional world what is
it like to have
um 20 dimensions of color
and in and a thousand dimensions of
emotion instead of just a few that we
have what what what is it like
um
my feeling is that we have the training
wheel set version right now of this
stuff really really small
um
and and so my guess is
I
one possibility is that look you and I
really are this infinite intelligence
this infinite Consciousness that's what
we really are
we're peering through
in this case a very very simple avatars
with very very simple interfaces
and maybe it's the one saying this is
fun but when I answer your question this
way maybe was the one saying yeah this
is greatness is fun but but there's so
much more to explore in different
dimensions now I haven't lost whatever I
learned in this little interface and I'm
happy for the relationships and the
friends and you know I'll you know and
all the things I learned about war and
hate and and religion and and all that
all that other stuff you know all the
things that go on here
um
but that's only a mere
in some sense trivial projection of this
entire cantor's hierarchy of Infinities
of potential this is
trivial and the potential is
mind-bogglingly infinite and so my
attitude let's get on with it we nothing
is lost
by moving on
and everything has to be gained this
Maya you can see but again these are
very very deep Waters I'm not talking
theorem and proof here I'm now speaking
very intuitively based on
the science says as it is in the very
um initial steps I should be very very
clear I mean all of science has been
about the space-time interface until the
last 20 years or so we're taking our
very very first baby steps outside of
space-time and so almost surely all of
the ideas that we're having are going to
look very naive
you know a century or two from now
they'll look back and go yeah great
generation they were the generation that
stepped outside of the space-time
interface hats off to them but boy were
their ideas so parochial they they were
shedding the interface but boy they
didn't really understand what they were
really doing that's my guess
all right I actually want to spend more
time in the intuitive but is there
anything from the paper or any sort of
grounded mathematics that you think will
ground people in your theory more in a
way that will keep the intuitive
exploration from just spinning off into
La La Land well yeah so I'll just say in
the paper I gave you and it'll come out
on June 24th it's going to be made in
all all tweeted if you made it this far
in the interview read the paper
yeah so it'll be available June 24th and
I'll tweet it when it um comes out it
might be a couple days before that I
would say one one of the interesting
things we're doing in that paper is
we're showing how specific properties of
the markovian dynamic subconscious
agents mapped to specific properties of
particles like Mass spin momentum and
energy
and so I'm not saying we're right but we
now have mathematically precise
proposals so I mean for example these
are words that won't make sense but mass
is the entropy rate of recurrent
communicating classes of conscious
agents and just to be clear what you're
saying you can predict now is particle
scattering this is going to be for for
particle scattering and and by the way
the reason I'm going after particle
scattering is is not because I have some
fetish for you know high energy physics
or something like that it's that's the
simplest place that we can make our
first connections with the interface
particles are the most Elementary things
that our interface has that's why I'm
going there they're the simplest thing
I'm not going for brains first because
those are countless quadrillions
trillions whatever of of particles and
and so that's not the place to start
let's see if we can get the mathematics
and and the experimental data for
individual particles so so our paper is
proposing and maybe just so the people
can show that we're wrong we'll see but
we have you know we say that mass is
so-called entropy rate of the recurrent
communicating classes and that has that
then tells us what our massless
particles and what our massive particles
and and and so we're getting very
specific predictions that we're going to
be making about momentum and spin and
and energy and mass so so that's why so
this is where rubber hits the road right
I'm talking all this High flute and
stuff about Consciousness leading to the
interface well the writing the right
questions are so what is the what is the
mass of an electron what part of your
conscious agent Dynamics is going to map
into what we call Mass what is the spin
in
um why is there a hyperfine structure in
the energy levels of the orbitals of
electrons and so forth we're getting
hints at answers to those kinds of
questions about like the hyperfine
structure so it's it's really quite
interesting so so again I would be
stunned if we're right
but at least we're precise so that we
can now begin the the whole
um process of of saying okay at least
these hypothesis hypotheses are precise
so now we can try to show their limits
try to prove where they reach their
limits and then move on or to show that
you know this is just fundamentally
wrong-headed there's nothing worthwhile
maybe our definition of mass is just
plain wrong we'll see
um but it's
it's intriguing it's intriguing enough
that um I have a particle physicist who
put his name on the paper with us
doesn't mean it's right it doesn't mean
that he's convinced that we're right but
we have a real particle physicist who
who thinks that
um it's it's if it's wrong it's not
obviously wrong and it's worth
pushing on right yeah I mean I hope
anybody listening to this understands
how the scientific method works I am
constantly trying to tell my team hey
you need to be Fearless in the
predictions that you make because you
shouldn't hold yourself accountable to
always being right you should hold
yourself accountable to always learning
and getting a little bit better so the
fact that you're willing to make a
precise prediction uh your paper is full
of mathematics and it's there for
anybody to check so people will be able
to help you find the edges which is
something I've heard you talk about and
I really respect about you is that one
you obviously approach everything with
humility but two you actively want
people to find the edges of your
hypothesis your theory so that you know
where it's wrong so you can adjust and
get more right Which is far more
interesting especially if you sincerely
want to understand what's outside of
that headset it's like well I would
rather realize I'm wrong right find out
how to get right so that I can actually
begin to explore that possibility Space
versus think I'm right but really I'm
wrong and nobody ever helps me come to
understand why
um I I really I really like that and I
hope everybody listening takes that on
in their own life I think that that's
really important okay so I wanted to to
make sure that you had a second to lay
out the grounding there that this is
something that you're seeing in particle
physics that there really is there there
to pursue
because the intuitive space for somebody
like me who's not a mathematician who
while I use the scientific method in
business I definitely do not consider
myself a scientist but pursuing the
intuitive things pursuing the thought
experiments
feels true to Einstein's encouragement
to all of us lay people to focus more on
imagination than
um knowledge right to to really
understand how to begin to think through
these things so one of his famous
thought experiments was that that in a
falling elevator you would feel like you
were weightless right and that ends up
being it took him years but he ends up
finally putting that together with some
other
um ideas that he had intuited including
if you're traveling at the speed of
light and you turn on a flashlight what
happens and
in that Spirit you said something as you
were describing the Consciousness and
you as an instantiation of that only to
go back to the one and you said well the
one is still learning what it needs to
learn and I am like a dog with a bone
with that idea what do you mean needs to
learn what like when I think about a
human right it needs to learn things two
stay alive because it's been given these
Drives By Evolution but what has set up
the uh the the Consciousness that isn't
physical right right to need anything
my guess again we're weighing over my
head but Mike here we are might as well
thank you
um
the joy of exploration
it's just pre-programmed how it is it's
just yeah that the
the one
is the only thing that there is but it's
infinitely
changing infinitely
there is self-exploration it's really
infinite self-exploration and looking
and and enjoying
and ever expanding it's it's uh
understanding of itself it's it's that
would be my my so you conceptualize it
as still moving towards pleasure
well that that that pleasure is just in
some sense
um
it's it's different than an evolutionary
thing so so an evolution and I should
say also concretely wise different this
dynamics of conscious agents does not
need to have an arrow of time
so there's
that's really interesting why because
that doesn't seem true okay the the
entropy one can write down a markovian
Dynamics in which the entropy does not
grow
straightforward but it's a theorem
three-line proof
trivial trivial proof that any
projection of that marketing dynamics
that has no error of time any projection
of it that loses information Say by
conditional probability
it will give you new Dynamics it'll be a
projected dynamics of the original
Dynamics and that new Dynamics will have
a narrow of time because
of the loss of information so the arrow
of time so here's my view
our experience right now of an arrow of
time
and of the universe with the big bang
and then maybe a big crunch or whatever
or entropy death at the end that whole
Arrow of time is not an Insight at all
into what lies Beyond space-time it's an
artifact
of the projection and from an
evolutionary point of view right time is
the fundamental limited resource right
if I run out of time before I get my
next meal if it takes much time to get
my next meal it's over if I if it takes
much time to get my next drink of water
it's over for me time is my most
fundamental limited resource
so that limited resource
of time is not an incident to reality
that's an artifact of projection from a
Timeless conscious agent Dynamics and
that also suggests all the other limited
resources that's all artifacts so
evolution of natural selection is a
beautiful Theory
but it's the theory of all the artifacts
that you see when you do a projection
from a realm in which there are no limit
to resources there is no competition
but what looks like evolution of a
natural selection in this projection it
looks like there's an arrow of time so
all of our intuitions right now about
learning new stuff is going to be very
hard for us because our intuitions are
deeply shaped right now by our interface
where there's an entropy Arrow
and in this realm Beyond
there is need not be an entropy Arrow
and so wrapping our heads around what
it's like
in in to to have the notion of
exploration where there's no entropy
Arrow
now I'm not saying I'm wrap my head
around it but I do know that the
mathematics is there that the
convenience does not have to have an
arrow of time in the in the sense of an
arrow of increasing entropy
so so and that's again one of the points
of doing
science with precise mathematics
I get emails
quite often from people that I think are
are very very bright and have really
good ideas
and they don't know how to take them and
make them precise and as a result you
can never surprise yourself
you can never
like like Einstein when he had his idea
about you you mentioned the falling
elevator and so forth and and so he had
that one 1907 or something like that
1906 and it wasn't he worked for years
to take that idea
and make it mathematically precise 1915.
and he had he learned tons and tons of
what at the time was state of the art
new fairly new math
it was hard for him sleepless nights
pulling his hair out really working hard
to take his good intuition and turn so
he finally wrote down in mathematics in
1915. and a year later
um
a guy named schwartsfield
wrote back to Einstein and said here's a
solution to your questions
and they predict what we now call black
holes
now Einstein
didn't
foresee that
he didn't like it he didn't believe it
he disbelieved in black holes
he wanted to get rid of them
so Einstein's theory came back and
surprised him
and that's why it's so important for us
to do science because what we do is we
take our best ideas that we have right
now
and then we we make them mathematically
precise and then the mathematics comes
back and it slaps us in the face and
says here are the implications of your
of the ideas that you started with the
implications that you simply couldn't
think deeply enough about on your own
but the mathematics can take you where
your own you know just Consciousness
wouldn't necessarily go and so so here's
one of those directions with this notion
of conscious agents
the Dynamics need not have
increasing entropy
and so our whole intuition about an
arrow of time need not hold in this
realm so when we talk about the notion
of explore Consciousness exploring for
the joy of it
we're going to have to re-jig how we
think about the notion of for us
exploration is something that happens in
an era of time what is what does it mean
for us can we
wrap our heads around the notion of
exploration where we let go of an
increasing entropy kind of thing
I'm not I don't know if we can maybe you
just have to let go of this headset
altogether to really get that but is it
possible while we're under the limits of
this headset to to wrap our minds around
it we can at least get pointers to that
idea our mathematics led to this pointer
um and I would never even gone there
unless the mathematics took me there so
so that's
so so I would say that
it's just like you know um the amateur
astronomer with a pair of binoculars
can could be brighter than the guy with
the James Webb Space Telescope
but he's never going to beat the guy
with the James Webb Space Telescope
because the guys got better tools and
that's what science does for you you may
be smarter than Einstein but if you
don't actually put yourself
using the tools of mathematics and so
forth
that genius will never actually
flower in the sense of reaching all the
potential implications of what it means
and so that's why we do science the way
we do with mathematical Precision
because
for two reasons if our ideas are good we
probably don't understand all their
implications and so the math will come
back and it'll be our teacher and second
certainly our ideas have their limits
and it's hard for us to understand what
the limits are and in good cases the
math will come back and tell us what
those limits are so for example
Einstein's theory of gravity together
with Quantum field Theory tell us 10 to
the minus 33 centimeters and space time
is over it has no operational meaning
who could have guessed could you have
guessed you know could Einstein have
guessed oh yeah I have this idea about
space time but at 10 to the minus 33
centimeters is going to follow her not
even an Einstein could guess that that
would only come
um through taking your ideas making them
doing the travail I mean Einstein really
it was a birthing process it was very
apparently very very hard
um to give birth to general relativity
and many mathematicians working in
physics and so forth say the same thing
you're working in the dark it's hard
you're you're struggling and then all of
a sudden if you're lucky you get that
breakthrough and and you see things but
then it comes back and you learn the
limits of the basic concepts that you
started with
and then you reboot from a new set of
assumptions
it's interesting that you say about the
set of assumptions so as we explore this
topic I realize that
um I think we still have
we each have slightly different
assumptions though I think that we're
talking well about the topic but take
the arrow of time for instance so the
thing that I find fascinating about the
hypothesis that you put forward is for
me anyway I don't have the math to back
it up this is definitely land of
intuition but what I find fascinating is
if you're correct and it's just
Consciousness is the singular thing
it is
for whatever reason Joy need to pursue
desire to learn whatever it's running
through all of this qualia
um
and that the tool it uses to do so is
this headset there's an infinite array
of headsets but the one we're in has
learned that there's only certain qualia
that can be achieved when there is an
arrow of time
and that's why I'm saying when you first
said that I was like I don't know that
that's true meaning inside the headset
for at least certain types of qualia it
is clear in fact we we the only thing we
know is that the quality that we have
access to requires
the arrow of time
we presume that there are infinite
headsets that provide just unimaginable
unknown types of qualia but the type
that we have directly experienced all
require the arrow of time
that's right and that that's
we've been shaped basically by our
headset to to think that way and if I
ask you to imagine a new color
that you've never seen before hmm
you can't do it I mean again it's not
because there aren't I mean pigeons have
four color receptors presumably pigeons
are experiencing colors that that no
human
has could even imagine and maybe the
mantis shrimp is seeing stuff that the
the pigeon can't
you know and and then the birds that see
polarization of light I mean they're
seeing something that I I what is it
like to see polarization of light I
don't know it
what is it like to have infrared vision
like certain Pit Vipers
what is it like to actually experience
an electric field to sense some electric
field for some fish or
creatures and underwater I mean I have
no what is it like to be a bad doing
echolocation I I don't know I literally
have no idea so so these are Pointers to
me that's I mean in the headset we get
all these hints
of Realms of qualia
utterly outside anything that I can
completely imagine
so talk to me about near-death
experiences and then I want to get into
um psychedelics and whether they are
simply another form of quality of what
it's like to be a human who's having
that experience or whether that's
actually melting the human away and
revealing something closer to being the
one again
but what can we learn from near-death
experiences do you think it's a like a a
sort of half return to the one or is it
just well that's what happens in the
headset to the brain when you deprive it
of oxygen
well from a physicalist framework
clearly the latter is the case right so
from a physicalist framework space time
is fundamental and Consciousness is a
product of the brain and so any
experiences of transcendence so things
going beyond the headset have to be just
the brain malfunctioning in its final
throws of death something like that
but if space-time is doomed does the
physicist tell us and it's not
fundamental then that leaves open the
possibility doesn't dictate that
near-death experiences are genuine
insights into some
ex conscious experiences that transcends
our space-time interface but it
certainly is is compatible with that
point of view and so I think it's worth
on on that framework to explore the
possibility
um that there are some insights and I
would take any of those reports like we
take any kind of eyewitness testimony
right with a grain of salt and you try
to get corroboration and and
um and discount it but but but on the
other hand you don't want to just ignore
the data either right so there's the the
fine line to to be opened to get the
insights but but not to um
to jump on anything just because it sort
of fits your preconceived conceptions
most of our preconceived conceptions are
deeply wrong we thought the Earth was
flat
we thought the Earth was the center of
the universe
we thought space and time were
fundamental
wrong wrong wrong wrong so so we're
betting poorly so so anything that even
for if we think that consciousness
Will Survive
death well we think about that
the way we think about it is probably
wrong
and so what we what we have to do is
again be so that's why I'm being when I
say we're in deep Waters here and I'm
being very very careful it's these are
things that my theory our Theory um
suggests but but I don't want to be at
all doctrinaire I think what I should do
is make bold proposals
but they're just proposals
and the goal is to be precise so we can
figure out where the proposals are wrong
so so yeah so in that Spirit yeah the
near-death experiences may have some
good data about
transitions out of this interface
um in that in that spirit and there's
probably modalities of what people bring
back
yeah there are there are some
commonalities
um there's
a lot of reports of you know going
through a tunnel a light tunnel some
like a review I think Ray Moody or
something like that um is famous for for
um categorizing a lot of the
similarities in in near-death
experiences uh a Life review and then of
course the reports we have are people
who came back so then they they came
back and so forth so so there are
um
there are but but there are also some
that report you know horrific you know
it's just not all not all reports are
are great so
um someone that that
we know personally had a near the death
experience and was very very um
pleasurable and came back and has no
fear she claims to have no fear of death
now um
um
so I so I don't know so yeah uh
be part of the film that's exploring
these near-death experiences there it's
put out um
the
the I think it's the langone Medical
Center in New York there are
there are some cardiologists
who are you know they they work with
patients who die but with with new
Cardiology techniques they can keep the
heart and the body in from deteriorating
for quite a long time now you know an
hour or something or maybe longer and
then they can bring these people back
and so this film is partly directed by a
cardiologist or who who was seeing so
many of these experiences that that he
wanted to document what he's seeing in
the ER you know and and
um
again you know I'm not going to be a
doctrinaire about it but I think it's
data that shouldn't be ignored and how
we should interpret it we should be very
careful so if that stuff is real
the prediction that that seems to make
is that not only is there a sense of
Consciousness that remains but that
there is
sensory perception that
holds out for quite a while because at
least from the things I've heard people
come back with a sense of either it's
peaceful or whatever but that means that
they were able to experience that and
retain it that's right that's right yeah
this is quite fascinating yeah that
again this is exactly the right
scientific way to think about that
that's this is data Maybe if it is Data
what does it entail about
um letting go of the headset and and
what kind of experience we might expect
have afterwards and is that just a
transitional thing or is it more
permanent and so forth right right dude
that is so fascinating everything that
we've talked about today the research
all of it has has really made me start
to question
um my own thoughts around this idea the
paper is amazing where can people follow
along with you as you continue this
journey well yeah so I do post on
Twitter
that my handle is at Donald D Hoffman
h-o-f-f-m-a-n all one word lowercase and
every time I publish a paper I
put a link to the actual Journal article
and then also talks like this you
podcast anything that comes up I will
post those so there I you can also um
if you if you're a scientist of course
you can just go to Google Scholar and
type in my name
if you just dollyhofen Google Scholar
you can get directly to I have roughly
120 Publications awesome all right
everybody if you haven't already be sure
to subscribe and until next time my
friends be legendary take care peace
if you want to really go deep into this
theme check out this compilation of my
best moments with Donald Hoffman this
gives us possibly a chance to have a
language which for the first time ever
we might be able to formulate a precise
hypothesis about what we mean by the
word god